Illegal Life in Holland/NAMEENTITY I moved to Holland/NAMEENTITY back in 1928  having applied for a job there and been given the position . I only witnessed the events leading up to the occupation of Holland/NAMEENTITY in 1940 from the outside . My mother and stepfather were living in Germany/NAMEENTITY and I went to visit them often . However  I hadn't had any first - hand experience of National Socialism before 1940 . I lived in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY and worked as a grain merchant  having completed a business apprenticeship before moving to Holland/NAMEENTITY .
I then got some practical experience at a grain mill at the port in Rotterdam/NAMEENTITY  where I came into contact with common  working - class folk . This was how I learnt Dutch and I picked up how to speak the language as the locals did . This was very important later on in terms of disguising myself to fit in . Later  I went on to work at the company 's headquarters . When the Germans invaded Holland/NAMEENTITY on 11 May 1940  I knew exactly what this would mean for me as a Jew .
To start with  I carried on with my employment as a mid - level employee at a large trading company . I did not have Dutch citizenship . The Nazi 's first approach was to force the Jews to deliver radios and bicycles  but I wasn't affected by this in the beginning . After the Germans marched into Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  a suicide epidemic erupted . Two of my friends were among those involved in this  but one was stopped before it was too late .
Others tried to flee illegally . Basically  us Jews were under no illusions about the fate that awaited us . At this time  I was a member of the KP Neederlande . It was extremely difficult when  in February 1941  the so - called Dutch National Socialist Movement – presumably on the Germans ' orders – started a small - scale pogrom in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  abusing older people and the like . Us Jews in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY had our own structure that reflected that in place amongst the population at large .
So we had Jewish police officers  Jewish craftsmen  Jewish scientists and Jewish bank directors . The psychological effects of this were as follows : When the Nazis smashed up Bank Director Cohn 's china in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY  his response may well have been : Oh well  as long as that 's all that happens . But Postman Cohn or Unemployed Cohn in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY was not quite so calm following the destruction of his child 's bed given that items had been taken away from him that were essential to his life . The outward difference here was that the neighbour of Mr Bank Director/MILITARY Cohn/MILITARY in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY would either have been a man in a similar position to our Mr Cohn with a similar way of thinking or perhaps it would have been Postman Müller  who would have told himself that Mr Bank Director got what he deserved . The neighbour of Postman Cohn in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  on the other hand  would have been Locksmith Jansen and he would have known only too well what it meant - 2 - to be robbed of things vital to you .
Just a few short days after these young people were taken away  their families received the news that they had all died from heart problems . Only one of them  who had escaped in transit and returned to Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  was reported to have been shot while trying to escape . The population of Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY was severely emotionally affected and responded with anger . A general strike was declared and the KP Neederlande thought to have instigated it . All business in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY was brought to a complete halt for around 24 hours .
No trams or other public transport was running and workers walked out of their factories  salespeople left their stores and office workers abandoned their offices . I hadn't personally been told about the planned strike beforehand  but I joined in as soon as I heard about it by leaving work in such a way that made the others follow me . If you ask me  there were a lot of victims from this one - day strike since the Nazis didn't just sit back and accept it . In fact  taking this stand was a really important move as far as the resistance against the Germans was concerned because it showed the Dutch population that resistance was a viable option . Plus  the fact that people didn't have to be affiliated to a particular political party in order to join in with the strike meant that even people based outside of Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY who weren't even actively involved in it then felt morally obliged to take part in some form of resistance against the German occupying forces .
As the developments at the front made it look unlikely that the war would be coming to an end in the foreseeable future  I made the decision to die standing . I had joined the KP Neederlande just after the Nazis came to power in Germany/NAMEENTITY . Up to this point  my involvement in the party hadn't extended beyond taking part in Marxist training courses and getting involved in providing aid to Jewish and non - Jewish emigrants . It was showing anti - Fascist solidarity without a party - specific message2 . One evening  we were in a class  being taught about the Communist manifesto by a German Communist  when there was a knock at the door .
One of our comrades came in and took the course instructor out of the room . The latter came back in shortly and announced : I'm going to Spain/NAMEENTITY . He turned to me and said  You can take over with the rest of the teaching . My immediate response was that I hadn't had enough training myself . He replied  If I can decide to go to Spain/NAMEENTITY in less than 10 minutes  you can prepare yourself to teach the rest of the course in that time too .
I was very much of the belief that anything that would strengthen the resistance was good and anyone willing to respond to the call to arms was welcome regardless of their motivation . And it was by following these principles that I succeeded . I was then entrusted with designing and printing flyers . In the meantime  the situation had progressed to the point that it was suggested that the Jewish employees at my company ( around 12 to 15 people ) should leave ( I was actually only still part of the company nominally )  as there was still the option of a settlement being paid out at this stage but there was some speculation about them maybe having to let us go in a few weeks without this payment . At this point  unemployed people in Holland/NAMEENTITY were forced to go to Germany/NAMEENTITY as foreign labourers  so the majority of Dutch companies held on to their staff even when there wasn't enough work for them .
This was the case at the company I worked for . We  the Jewish contingent at work  decided to accept the management team 's offer - 4 - to take six months ' pay but leave immediately . And I want to add at this point that I  and others  received financial support from the Directors later down the line . It was around this time that the Jewish star badges were introduced in Holland/NAMEENTITY and I wore one myself for a few weeks . After being mobbed and threatened by German soldiers and officers  though  I decided to resolve this issue by no longer wearing the Jewish star .
Young Jews in particular were arrested there at every opportunity and my landlady started to get nervous . I was worried that she might be so scared that she would betray me  so I moved to The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY . I had some friends ( a Protestant man and Jewish woman ) there who offered me a place to hide . I didn't know my way around the city at all and one day I ended up right in the middle of a Jewish raid . Back in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  I had managed to get hold of forged ID papers .
The forgery wasn't exactly the most sophisticated and I was terrified that there was no way that the Dutch police officer who had caught me wouldn't notice . I decided to take a risk and rudely told him that I would have to lodge a complaint if he didn't let me go on my way immediately . I explained that I was in The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY on official business for the Ministry of Food . I went on to say that I had absolutely no idea what he wanted with me and that they had detained me for several hours in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY too without any legitimate reason . The police officer started to bluff and apologised  explaining that I looked a bit Jewish and that the stamp on my ID papers had made him suspicious ( note that this was the only genuine thing on the documentation ) .
Then he let me go . I asked my friend in The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY to travel to Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY for me to find out how my - 5 - female Jewish friend3 was doing . He came back with the news that she and her brother had been summoned to work in Poland/NAMEENTITY and that they would be leaving the next morning . I made my way to Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY without delay and went to the apartment that my friend ( whose father did some minor tailoring work ) lived in . When I entered the apartment  my friend was sitting at the table with her mother and two strange men .
We stayed in The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY with the same friends as before for a while . It wasn't long before the KP sourced us some ration cards . These cards had been stolen from rural offices by action groups  which were not linked to any particular political party and also included a lot of students . One student group managed to get hold of better ID papers for me and my female friend . I also asked students to get similar papers for other Jews in hiding .
We had to pay a price for these papers . One of the Directors at the company I used to work at gave me the money we needed without making me tell him what I was going to use it for . In Holland/NAMEENTITY  this was a matter of pride and honour . A national front had been created – an individual 's political leanings didn't matter anymore . It was all about doing whatever it took to save people 's lives .
After a few weeks  I thought it was advisable that my female friend and I moved in with some acquaintances of my male friend . I then left her there alone and returned to Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  where I stayed with someone I used to work with  who was now working as a minor official at a government office . He stole some sheets of paper with an official letterhead and a genuine government stamp for me . I used them to create official assignments that I could use for identification purposes . For example  I used the following kind of text addressed to myself : Upon your visit to company X or Y  it is essential that you check they are using this or that type of flour .
I was careful to never use any names in these letters . Now that I was back in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  I took charge of my old group again and we started to copy and disseminate anti - Nazi propaganda materials like before . For instance  we equipped the basement of one house with typewriters and - 6 - copiers . When we arrived to start work one morning  we noticed there had been a break - in and the typewriters had been stolen . We moved our base to another location right away .
Unfortunately  he didn't want to leave his young wife on her own and a few days later he was arrested . About a week after that  his wife received the news that he had died from a heart condition . Given that no searches were performed at my home or at the home of any of the other members of our group around this time  we can assume that this young Dutch man 's unbreakable silence was the cause of his death . To be on the safe side  I moved several times outside of Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY . Upon my return to the city  I found that my friends were ready to continue with our work without any exceptions .
I got a gun at this point and once again resolved to never be taken in by the Germans alive . The situation continued to get more and more critical . It goes without saying that the Germans were not unaware of the fact that many Jews were in hiding in Holland/NAMEENTITY . They ramped up the raids . One of my Jewish friends was found in his hideout .
He tried to resist and was killed there and then . It was also around this time that the friends I had stayed within The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY were arrested . My friend 's Jewish wife had taken her mother and brother in . These two were detained and sent to Poland/NAMEENTITY  whilst the wife herself was taken to a camp  before being exonerated there and deported . Her husband also ended up in a concentration camp .
He actually survived and the child is still alive now too . I then found out that there was a Dutch man living in Haarlem4/NAMEENTITY  who had a way of smuggling Jews out of the country . I believed him to be an informant and tried to ascertain whether or not my suspicions were justified by visiting him at his home . The man was very taken aback by my visit  but said he would be willing to get me to Switzerland/NAMEENTITY . When I asked him for details about the transport and preparations  it became clear that he was in fact a Gestapo agent .
This man was an antisemite  in every sense of the word . But he had invited me over at a critical time to prove to himself that his hate of the Jews had nothing whatsoever to do with the antisemitism of the Nazis . One day  the Germans searched systematically for Jews throughout the southern district of Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY . By chance  I managed to avoid this raid despite living in the area . At the time  I was in contact with a German woman who worked in the SD ( Security Service ) kitchen and invited me along so I could eat .
The SD weren't aware that this woman 's fiancé had been killed by the SA ( Assault Division ) several years previously for political reasons . When I went to see her one Saturday lunchtime to get something to eat  she told me that I needed to leave the city right away as a squad of thousands of police officers was expected to arrive later that day . I ran out of the house  grabbing a fishing rod that was standing in the hallway  and retreated to the countryside . I returned to Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY around two days later and although I hadn't been caught  several hundred Jews had been arrested . What I can say is that there were two groups of trustworthy helpers standing by at all times : political and religious fanatics .
I never did find out where they got that information from . Eventually  I ended up back in The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY . This was around the time the Battle of Arnheim broke out in 1944 . After my female friend had been working as a maid in a residential suburb just outside of The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY for a while  I had let her leave for Arnheim/NAMEENTITY  where she had been promised somewhere safe to stay . But now I considered her life to be in danger there  so I sourced a Red Cross vehicle with two uniformed drivers .
I sent one of the drivers off with the medical certificate to the office that needed to issue the travel command . I decided to stay with the doctor whilst the driver did this as I couldn't risk the terrified man being so scared that he felt the need to call this office to declare the certificate invalid . Luckily  everything worked out well and we drove straight from the doctor 's house to Arnheim/NAMEENTITY . On the way there  we didn't come across a single vehicle  but the roads were littered with burnt - out cars . German and English artillery shots were fired above us throughout our entire journey .
We saw German troops lying in the ditches to the sides of the roads  but we managed to make it to Arnheim/NAMEENTITY without any trouble at all . The house that my female friend had been living in had been abandoned . The house next door was completely destroyed . After wandering around for a while  we eventually found who we were looking for and we were able to set off together on our journey back to The/NAMEENTITY Hague/NAMEENTITY . On the way this time  an SS staff messenger stopped us and got into our car .
Despite our protests and attempts to quote the Geneva Convention  he wouldn't go away . However  in the end  having him with us may have provided us with some protection against any further checks . Shortly after this  I was stopped in the street in Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY by an SS officer during one operation . He pulled me into the hallway of a house and started to question me there . I was frightened to death because I had illegal materials with me in my briefcase ( although they were well hidden away in amongst dirty laundry ) .
In the summer of 1944  I heard that the Gestapo had searched several of my former homes and were also trying to find out information about me . At this time  the worsening food shortage also meant that all of the people that had helped me by giving me a roof over my head started to lose their nerve and I once again found myself struggling to find accommodation even for one night at a time . Based on all of these factors  I decided to make the leap over to the allied armies . The ( Dutch ) brother of my landlady at the time was afraid of being taken in as a foreign labourer and so he decided to join me in my plan to head to the south of the country or to Belgium/NAMEENTITY until we found allied troops . I found a ladies ' bike without any tyres and took it with me on my journey .
The hardest part was having to cross the three big branches of the Rhine  with some of the crossings under heavy surveillance or completely destroyed . But we managed it and we arrived in Tilburg/NAMEENTITY  the city in which my companion 's childhood home was located  sometime around 24 August 1944 . The English army occupied Tilburg/NAMEENTITY just two or three days later and my time living illegally came to an end . I later heard that my final fixed abode had been searched and all of my housemates had been arrested . Luckily  they had all survived .
After setting fire to the synagogue and destroying Jewish property in Breslau/NAMEENTITY the Gestapo rounded up the whole male Jewish population . Rosten was arrested on 11 November 1938 and sent to Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY . About 3 people arrived there within two days . 5 storeys of shelves of bare wood served as sleeping accommodation . People were flogged at night in front of the huts and many perished .
P. Rosten 's Experiences in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY Concentration Camp In the following pages I shall describe  in the whole  only my personal experiences  what I have seen with my eyes or have heard with my ears . Should I mention events I have been told by other people I would make it quite clear . In the night of November 9th to 10th 1938 - the night following the mysterious death of one of the German Secretaries to the German Embassy in Paris/NAMEENTITY  shot at by a young Jew - at Breslau/NAMEENTITY  the town where I lived  like in all the other towns in the whole of Germany/NAMEENTITY the biggest Jewish Synagogue  a large building in the middle of the town  was set on fire by the SS and all Jewish shops were destroyed . In the morning I got the news by phone from my sister and went to see with my own eyes what I could n’t believe .
The compartments were not crowded . In every compartment were posted a Police Officer  fully armed with pistol and rifle and an armed SS - man . Besides a kick with the butt - end of a rifle  if somebody was not quick enough in boarding the train  nothing happened . I reckon that we were about 1000 to 1500 arrested people . The train left Breslau/NAMEENTITY at about 10 o’clock in the night and arrived at Weimar/NAMEENTITY next morning at about 8 o’clock .
Long before  watching the stations where thr train stopped we had no doubt about our journay ’s destination : Buchenwald.-/NAMEENTITY After the train had stopped in Weimar Station Police Officers with loaded rifles were placed at both sides of the train filled with unarmed Jews  their rifles directed against the windows of the train . During the time we had to wait for the order to leave the train we had ample opportunity to get to know the mentatlity of our future guards . A youngster  belonging to the SS - Death Head Formation  came into our compartment  telling that he lived formerly at Weimar/NAMEENTITY too and asking for some Jewish people he would have liked to meet in the C.C. He was not more than 20 . ( The whole lot guarding the Camp were about 20 or in the early 20ties but the Commander ) .
But a man from Breslau/NAMEENTITY Mr. T. had to go round for the whole time in slippers as the SS - men who arrested him did not give him time to put on his shoes . ) One hour passed . Then we were ordered to alight and to take off our hats and glasses .
I saw one man lying on the pavement  trampled down  unable to get up or to move himself  and he was carried away by 4 other men . I am sure he was dead or dying  the first of the many victims of the ‘ action ’ ( that was the official term  used in the Camp ) . Later on we were told that the very first victim was a man who committed suicide the night before in the train . ( Not the only one who did it . A former Judge from Breslau/NAMEENTITY committed suicide in the first night in the Camp with a pocket knife he had hidden from the Nazis ) .
( of course  regarding the whip ): ‘ A rogue ! ’ After a ride of about half an hour we arrived in the notorious Camp of Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY  a name of horror for every Jew and all decent people in Germany/NAMEENTITY . Some short general remarks : Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY is situated in the middle of Thuringia/NAMEENTITY on top of a hill surrounded by lovely forest covered small mountains . It is really blasphemy if - 4 - you remember that Goethe recovered rather often near this place from his duties and found fresh inspirations in this beautiful landscape . - The place is hort of water due to the structure of the soil .
When our lorries had passed the main gate they stopped on a large parade ground and we had to leave the lorries in the usual hurry and with the usual help . It was about 10 o’clock a.m. and during the whole day we were moved on the parade ground . For the whole time Jews from all parts of Germany/NAMEENTITY arrived . ( The Hews from Berlin/NAMEENTITY were brought to the C.C.
at Sachsenhausen/NAMEENTITY near Berlin/NAMEENTITY  the Jews from South Germany/NAMEENTITY to Dachau/NAMEENTITY near Munich/NAMEENTITY ) . At Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY during these 2 days about 10 people arrived  about 3 between them from Breslau/NAMEENTITY  and about the same number from Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY - on - Main . It was a dark night when at midnight we physically and mentally exhausted  not to say broken  were allowed to enter a large hut . We had not got any food nor drink since the afternoon the day before . We passed the rest of the night in the not yet finished hut sitting on large logs and boards leaning one to the other .
The prisoners who had to live for a longer time ( some for many years )  in the C.C./NAMEENTITY were accomodated in small huts  got prisoner ’s wear  had to work hard ; they could wash every second day . We 10 taken into the C.C. during this ‘ November action ’ were accomodated into 5 large wooden sheds  quickly and roughly built . The arrangements in these - 5 - huts I can not compare but with the bookshelves in a library . On the walls and between there were erected large wooden frames with 5 storeys of shelves .
In the first nights which I shall describe later many men started crying  driven nearly or really mad . There were some men about 70  on the other hand boys under 18  crippled men  sick men  the worst very likely  a barrister from Hannover/NAMEENTITY  wounded in the last war  with many scars in his face  one eye lost  incapable to walk without other people ’s help . One of the worst features was the thirst . We had no possibility to get water . Later on we could buy sometimes mineral water  though rather expensive .
We were warned by more experienced people to hide some of our money  and - 8 - so I kept in my hand ½ Mk  about lod to pay for it  but the SS - man serving as cashier took out of my pocket 5 Mk  about 8/  that was the most expensive shave I ever got . Before we left the Camp the had the impudence to collect money from us for the ‘ Winterhilfswerk des Deutschen Volkes ’ ( Winter Relief Funds for the German People ) and I am still glad that I managed to give not more than 10 Pf . ( 2d ) to these brutes . I am sure that they kept the money for themselves . Guards brought us to the main road leading to Weimar/NAMEENTITY  leading us through shrubs on a small slippery pathway through the forest  in a hurry of course .
From Weimar/NAMEENTITY we were not allowed to travel by fast train . Next morning I arrived at home - but I had to report at once to the Gestapo H.Q. and to sign a form that I acknowledged to have been released from the C.C. only to be able to speedy up my and my family ’s emigration . But it lasted 8 long and dreadful months before we reached this helpful country and could spleep for the first time without fear to experience once more a German/NAMEENTITY concentration camp .
Ill - treatment at Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY In 1933  at the start of the Nazi régime  my father lost his job working for the Berlin/NAMEENTITY city council . He was a qualified banker and was employed by the council in this capacity . Apart from the loss of his post  my father encountered relatively few problems right up until 1938 . This was mainly because he was married to an “ Aryan ”  and the children from this marriage had been baptised and brought up in the Christian faith . But in 1938 he was suddenly arrested  despite not having committed any criminal offence .
It consisted of an iron cage lined with long sharp nails . Prisoners subjected to this punishment rarely survived the ordeal . We were only able to secure my father ’s release because we ( his family ) managed to obtain a passage for him to Shanghai/NAMEENTITY . He was therefore freed earlier than others  but on the condition that he reported every day to his local police station . My father left Germany/NAMEENTITY on 20 February 1939 .
He died in Shanghai/NAMEENTITY as a result of the ill - treatment suffered while in prison .
A report of an interview . Together with the whole Jewish community of Stettin/NAMEENTITY  the Heymann family was deported under appalling conditions to Belsyce/NAMEENTITY near Lublin/NAMEENTITY on 13 February 1940 . Half of the eight thousand inhabitants were Jews - the Poles  including the Polish partisans  betrayed the Jews for a reward from the Germans . Two men escaped from an extermination camp and told about the ‘ shower - baths ’ and that nobody left these camps alive ; also that the SS were never granted leave . At Belsyce/NAMEENTITY  a great many Jews lived in hiding .
Transfer to Mielec/NAMEENTITY ; twelve hours ’ daily work in a factory ; nearly no food ; filth and vermin unbearable . With 20 other prisoners  the author was working in an aircraft factory at Flossenburg/NAMEENTITY  Bavaria/NAMEENTITY . In 1944  many Hungarian Jews arrived . On a week ’s march towards Dachau/NAMEENTITY  the Jewish prisoners were machine - gunned from the air most of the time ; many died from exhaustion and starvation . Report on the experiences in Poland/NAMEENTITY of Manfred Heymann  1940 - 1945 In 1940  Manfred was 10 years of age .
He lived with his parents and his sixteen - year - old brother Eugen  in Stettin/NAMEENTITY . On February 13  1940  the whole family  including the 76 - year - old grandmother who was living with them  was taken by the Gestapo to be”evacuated ” to Poland/NAMEENTITY . They were allowed to take one suitcase each . On this transport all the Stettin/NAMEENTITY Jews were taken  only “ Mischlinge ” being left . The three to five thousand people were transported in trains  fairly well treated and fed adequately on the journey .
Then the transport was divided into three sections . The first went to Piaski/NAMEENTITY  the second to Glusk/NAMEENTITY and the third  which included the Heymann family  to Belsyce/NAMEENTITY . The journey to Belsyce/NAMEENTITY was made in sledges and Manfred remembers this as a nightmare . They took all day to cover the 24 km . in the bitter cold and snow .
? mp . This was the first the Belsyce Jews had heard of such camps . The two were Warsaw/NAMEENTITY Jews . They had been taken by train to a camp in the East/NAMEENTITY .
On 27 February 1942  early in the morning  heavy lorries arrive  and at great speed and with many brutalities the victims are loaded onto them . At the last moment the commander and his minions at random seize another 100 persons and push them on the lorries . Hardly an hour later the lorries return  empty but for the clothing of the owners who have gone to their mass grave Duenamuende/NAMEENTITY . Duenamuende/NAMEENTITY Yonder  where the wide stream of the Duena/NAMEENTITY flows into the waters of the North Sea like a cornucopia  one finds on the flat beach and on the brim of spacious woodland that stretches down the cost  many isolated farmhouses and small sttlements  whose inhabitants mainly earn their livelihood by fishing and by cultivating the rich grassland and the fertile fields . The war brought many hardships to these people  but at the time when our tragedy took place there  they had not been troubled with actual combat scenes and the general horrors of war .
A new camp is to be started there . You will have modern clean billets In Duenamuende/NAMEENTITY . Much better than here in the Ghetto/NAMEENTITY . Not so cramped  much more comfrotable and cleaner . Many fishing nets need mending in Duenamuende/NAMEENTITY  and tins are to be manufactured there .
In my room there was another Jewess who had gone to Brazil/NAMEENTITY with her six - year - old son the year before  as her husband had got a job there . She contracted typhoid and yellow fever  spent six months in a Brazilian hospital and was strongly advised by the doctors to return to Europe/NAMEENTITY . The German consulate in Rio/NAMEENTITY offered to pay 50 per cent of her return passage . This woman was also kept in preventive custody  although she required more medical treatment immediately . They wanted to put the child into an orphanage but he was allowed to stay with his grandparents .
At that time this camp was run by the Hlinka Guard . The camp was permanently occupied by several thousand Jews  men women and children . New inhabitants arrived daily taken here from all parts of Slovakia/NAMEENTITY . About once a week there was a selection  that is to say that about 1000 of the inmates were selected to be put into railway carriages and transported to the East/NAMEENTITY . Mostly it was not clear what the criteria for the selection were  the interned inmates were assembled randomly and those destined for deportation were herded together into a particular barrack room which they were not allowed to leave until they were loaded onto the railway wagons .
The same thing happened at the British airfield  in Gatow/NAMEENTITY near Potsdam/NAMEENTITY  and at the northern airfield – I think it was Tegel . That ’s when you come to understand what ‘ Cold War ’ means  and how great the victory was that the English and Americans won over the Russians  though suffering heavy losses . And yet  whatever was achieved Berlin/NAMEENTITY could only be provided with the barest necessities . This lack of everything has lasted and is one reason why rebuilding Berlin/NAMEENTITY takes so very long . There are also other factors which produce the same effect : the division of Germany/NAMEENTITY into zones  the blockade between East/NAMEENTITY and West which cuts Berlin/NAMEENTITY off from West Germany/NAMEENTITY without which the city can not survive and the fact that Berlin/NAMEENTITY itself is chopped into sectors .
This is a new way of organising work . In the English press it is called a kind of modern slavery and the way in which the Soviets have brought back slavery in Europe/NAMEENTITY . The posters in the University present a very different idea . Pictures and texts show how the miner Stakhanov had one day beaten the record of some face worker because of the special way he had gone about his work  how he had consequently been entrusted with organising the work and how he had increased the productivity of mining and of the whole economy in Russia/NAMEENTITY with it  in a way unheard of before . They say his system will free the working masses from excessive work and will give them liberty at last .
One worked from 7 am to 7 pm . The cold in winter was so great that the breath from one ’s mouth turned into icicles and lay on the neck and chin and shirt . The block eldest  Chaim Rumkowsky  was a clever  but sadistically - disposed man . He was the Ghetto/NAMEENTITY ’s absolute ruler . He thought that as long as the Jews could productively work for the Germans  they would be preserved .
Transports arrived incessantly . The criminal police were in the Ghetto/NAMEENTITY and collected Jews who lived in Lodz/NAMEENTITY on a daily basis . They were beaten terribly . The food rations  which were meant to last for 14 days  arrived very irregularly  sometimes only after 4 weeks . They consisted of the following : margarine or oil – 2 ounces  sugar – 4 ounces  flour – 1 pound .
On one day in the Ghetto/NAMEENTITY  7 men were hanged for a minor offence . Everyone  including the children  had to assemble in the courtyard and watch the procedure . The children screamed and many women fainted . During one of the “ great curfews ”  one woman did not want to give them her child . It was torn from her arms  taken by its tiny feet  smashed with the head against the wall  and thereby murdered .
They were forced to wear the Judenstern ( yellow star badge ) and to give up their homes if they were not in the vicinity of the/NAMEENTITY Second/NAMEENTITY Viennese/NAMEENTITY District/NAMEENTITY and to move to this District . The vast number of Jews living there were coerced into providing rooms in their own homes to their coreligionists from other districts . It was often the case that Jews  regardless of their age or social standing  were forced out of their accommodations to carry out road cleaning works . At the same time  they boycott of Jewish businesses began . Until 1940  our personal situation as well as the situation of our business had been halfway bearable .
However  we never got anything . Fortunately  my husband still had his state pension  which he was receiving at least temporarily  since the Laenderbank was a French business . We were subsisting solely on that pension . The small apartment in the/NAMEENTITY Second/NAMEENTITY District/NAMEENTITY  which we had to move in to  was conducive to minimizing the living expenses . Apart from that  there was not much available for us to buy anyway .
He no longer went to his work and wanted to cross the/NAMEENTITY Grüne/NAMEENTITY Grenze/NAMEENTITY into Switzerland/NAMEENTITY . His reception by Swiss friends and also the route there where possible was prepared with the help of a good “ Aryan ” friend in Berlin/NAMEENTITY . But he seems to never have reached his destination . Miss Berend  a sister of the Jean - Paul researcher Dr. Eduard Berend  who at the time had gone to Genf  was collected here and already at the collecting point on Levetzowstrasse/NAMEENTITY .
These transports then initially went to three - 4 - camps in Schlesien/NAMEENTITY itself ( I also remember Grüssau and Riebnig near Brieg/NAMEENTITY )  where Jews could even have a camp organisation  and where we could send letters and packages . As was soon exposed  they were only meant as transition camps for the full evacuation . My sister  who lived with my parents  was very suddenly collected without prior notice . My parents were not allowed to bring her food and warm clothes at the collection point . She probably went to the Baltic/NAMEENTITY ; we have not heard anything more from her .
At one of the “ selections ” Masza and her family had been included for the transport to Ponary  and in a desperate effort to save her friend  the author prevailed upon Professor Kola Taranowski to give her shelter  so that she and her child did not have to return to the Ghetto/NAMEENTITY . The next day Masza escaped to Lida/NAMEENTITY . Encouraged by this success  the author applied for her own travel paper  and at the psychological moment asked for the inclusion of “ a child ” and followed Masza to Lida/NAMEENTITY . After days of frantic search and with the help of a parson  she located Masza and  in spite of the great dangers involved  travelled with her and the child to her home . Her husband soon agreed to keep mother and child .
Emigrants Frau BECK  now 80 years old  recounts : When we were at Eibsee in Upper/NAMEENTITY Bavaria/NAMEENTITY in the winter of 1927  we used to see young people every once in a while with a swastika on their jacket . This displeased one man who was clearly a regular at Eibsee ; he placed himself before the entrance of the Schwemme  where they usually stopped  intercepted the youths one by one and declared : ' Whoever wears such a badge does not come in here ! ' They simply turned around  left the place and are said to have headed towards Badersee/NAMEENTITY which is situated nearby . On 1 April 1933  Frau Beck had her habitual meeting with her married daughter at a hairdresser 's in Wittenbergplaz/NAMEENTITY in Charlottenburg/NAMEENTITY . Along the way  she saw the smashed in windows of the Kaufhaus des Westens and completely understood when her daughter declared that she wanted to leave the country with her family as soon as possible and  on no account  wanted to have her child grow up in this poisoned atmosphere .
Goerner gives instances of sadism existed by Obersturmfuehrer Stuczka  but also mentions that SS - Oberscharfuehrer Hanke treated the prisoners more decently . Goerner gives also dates of transports from Berlin/NAMEENTITY to Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY and from Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . Every two to three months about 8 people were sent to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . He estimates the total between 1941 and 1944 at 120 . Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY Concentration Camp - Ghetto The position of the Camp Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY  which was a fortress until 1882  is situated in the Bohemian area of Leitmeritz/NAMEENTITY  where the Eger/NAMEENTITY and Elbe/NAMEENTITY rivers converge  some 50 kilometres north of Prague/NAMEENTITY .
The agricultural team were based in D/NAMEENTITY I/NAMEENTITY  and they managed several hundred acres of land together with a haulage area and a lot of agricultural equipment . In addition there was the entire livestock that had come from the area of Lidice/NAMEENTITY  taken by the SS . The leader of the agriculture section was the Czech Cursavy  a member of the Nazi Party . There were only a few occasions when Cursavy hit his Jewish workers  and only then when the controlling SS made him do this . Blocks E Iva and E IVb were intended for the accommodation of children .
Those who were left behind were allowed to follow the carriage as far as the exit of the fortress . In the months September to October 1944 many thousands of urns ( cardboard cartons ) containing the ashes of those who had died up to that date were transported to the Eger/NAMEENTITY on the orders of the Command and under the supervision of the SS and then shaken into the river . Even children under 14 were called upon to do this work . The homes for the sick and infirm were in the block D VI and F III . All the very sick prisoners who were not expected to live were housed here .
A coal trader was happy to get me as a delivery man because it was difficult to get male employees at this time . But it happened as I had foreseen . My cover was blown and I was arrested by the Gestapo again . Three weeks I was in Rossauerlände/NAMEENTITY prison/NAMEENTITY . During a hearing the Gestapo official Schreiner said literally : “ We will destroy you like cats !
Against my religious convictions  I was forced to participate in Christian religious classes and services in Villeneuve/NAMEENTITY . In July 1944  I managed to pass the first part of the Abitur . Shortly after  however  I fled to Spain/NAMEENTITY with my father by walking over the Pyrenees/NAMEENTITY for three days ; from there  we later emigrated to Palestine/NAMEENTITY ( Israel/NAMEENTITY ) . It was impossible for me to finish the Realschule and consequently  I was unable to fulfil my wish to study medicine . London/NAMEENTITY  22.2.1957 .
signed E. Unger - 6 - Transcript . Affidavit . I  the undersigned  Gordin  Noémi  born on 3.7.1927 in Siauliai/NAMEENTITY the daughter of Jacob Gordin and his wife Rachel  née Zeiber residing at 14  Avenue du Général Clavery  Paris/NAMEENTITY  16th/NAMEENTITY arrondissement/NAMEENTITY declare the following affidavit . I am aware of the meaning of an affidavit and am also aware that a FALSE declaration is a criminal offence .
In Chemitz/NAMEENTITY the window panes of all the shops were destroyed . In the district of Ober/NAMEENTITY -/NAMEENTITY Wuchwitz/NAMEENTITY a house was destroyed . In the Villa Fliegschen in the district of Schönau/NAMEENTITY a pane of glass was destroyed . The officials of the responsible police station  Siegmar  were very humane and watched over the Jewish houses after this . In the warehouse Schocken/NAMEENTITY large damages were perpetrated .
The author lived in Berlin/NAMEENTITY throughout the Hitler period  hidden by Gräfin von Maltzan whom he later married . His mother was deported to Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY in 1942 . She died later in the same year at Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . Maria von Maltzan was well - known in the circles of the underground movement . She helped organising the escape of sixty Jews to Scandinavia/NAMEENTITY .
The last time they heard from their son was before the allies landed in Sicily/NAMEENTITY . He then went missing and presumably died in the first battle after the landing . ) - 4 - Unfortunately  before he died  my husband witnessed the Germans hoisting the flag on the summit of the/NAMEENTITY Caucasus/NAMEENTITY Mountains/NAMEENTITY and died with the feeling that we had lost to them . When I met Dr. Stadtler in November 1942  the situation could not have been more different .
Even the food was  by all means in the beginning  better : the hot food was more generous and substantial  with a larger bread topping . - 7 - There was sufficient time for lectures and studies . Minyan was regularly held . Even a Sefer Torah and a shofar were available . Talks in Spanish and French were held ( and I spoke about the Jews in Holland/NAMEENTITY and the role of Jewish Palestine/NAMEENTITY in the/NAMEENTITY Middle/NAMEENTITY East/NAMEENTITY ) .
Many people fled from the hunger to the North/NAMEENTITY  we also had such hunger evacuees in the house . Then the March offensive came with the achievements you are familiar with . Radio reports were becoming less  the few people who still secretly owned a radio  were without power  and who still had power “ clandestin ” ( secretly  W.L. )  hardly heard anything anymore as power was available mostly for the Germans for a few hours during the night . However  good reports get through to you .
At that time I was engaged and had even  when my parents were still alive  been married by a Rrabbi in the Ghetto/NAMEENTITY . My fiance who had friends who were working outside the Ghetto/NAMEENTITY as so - called “ commodity Jews ” ( Nutzjuden ) suggested that we might try to escape . These “ Nutzjuden ” worked in small factories as tailors or cobblers . They had to alter items of clothing that had been taken from the deported and to repair the shoes . We actually succeeded in leaving the Ghetto unnoticed and to reach these friends where we remained until it was dark .
Part of the night two of us slept and the others waited until they could lie down . Here it was much worse than in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY because the women from all the concentration camps in the Polish lands had come together in this place . Here I stayed for two months  then  in February  I went to Malchow/NAMEENTITY  a supplementary camp to Ravensbruck/NAMEENTITY which was situated on the/NAMEENTITY Mecklenburg/NAMEENTITY Plateau/NAMEENTITY . Here I was working in an underground munitions factory until I was freed on 9th April . We went  again on foot  back to Poland/NAMEENTITY .
The author is the widow of a Jewish doctor ( recipient of the Iron Cross First and Second Class in First World War ) ; in 1933  living at Lichterfelde near Berlin/NAMEENTITY  where non - Jews proved to be helpful . This was not the case in the Hansa/NAMEENTITY district in Berlin/NAMEENTITY  where she lived from 1934 - 1942 . She was deported to Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY in June 1942 . The report includes details of starvation  pests  epidemics  statistics of deaths and atrocities . A boy succeeded to get back from Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY and told that he was compelled to handle the gas bottles .
Some of her “ Aryan ” friends behaved decently ; former officers  e.g. those who wanted to demonstrate their sympathy  brought flowers to Mrs G. When it became more difficult for the Jews to go shopping  many “ Aryans ” helped her . Yet  in 1934  at the instigation of her children Mrs G. moved to Berlin/NAMEENTITY  to the/NAMEENTITY Hansa/NAMEENTITY Quarter/NAMEENTITY .
40 Jews were forced together into the Bauschewitz/NAMEENTITY valley . Gendarmes were there with their guns . Apparently 60 Jews were missing . They all stood there for 12 - 16 hours  upright and still . They received nothing to eat .
They formed a long line from Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY to Leitmeritz/NAMEENTITY and to the Eger/NAMEENTITY . The urns had to be passed from hand to hand until they reached the river  and they were then tossed in . Many women fainted and collapsed . Around 40 people died in Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY in three years  and a still greater number were deported to “ extermination camps ” . 10 died each year in the “ small fortress ” neighbouring Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY itself  a place to where Jews guilty of a crime were brought .
Ten days later  we learned that he had been imprisoned in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY . I have no cause to doubt my father ’s testimony  which he revealed to us under pledge of secrecy . In Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY he had to sign a declaration stating that he would tell nobody of his experiences  not even his closest family members . On arrival  his head was shaved . Then he was made to hand over his personal effects .
This appalling “ roll - call “ happened three times every week . The food  in short supply and of very poor quality  was dished out in the same bowls the prisoners washed in . Even those inmates with open tuberculosis were using the same bowls for eating and washing . Inside Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY camp was an area known as the “ death zone ”  a - 3 - strip of land about 20 metres wide that ran all the way round the electrified perimeter fence . Any prisoner entering the “ death zone ” was shot dead either by one of the watch tower guards or an SS man who happened to be nearby – there was no warning .
Selections . In spring 1942 all patients in the hospital were killed . In summer all children and old people were shot . In spring 1943  300 men and 100 women were taken to Budzin/NAMEENTITY  the rest were shot  most of them by the camp leader  SS Oberscharführer/MILITARY Veiks/MILITARY  a sadist who enjoyed killing . Horrible conditions in the camp .
But as the carriages were unheated  and it was a bitterly cold winter  the older people especially suffered greatly . On arrival at Lublin/NAMEENTITY  they were herded like cattle to the Lipowa P.O.W. Camp . Their luggage had been put in separate vans and none of it was ever returned to them . At this camp they remained for one day .
The second batch was selected in a similar way in Winter  1941  and sent to “ Judenlager ” Majdanek/NAMEENTITY . Now a Ghetto was established in Belsyce/NAMEENTITY . Jews from all the surrounding villages had to come to Belsyce/NAMEENTITY and live in certain streets . By the beginning of 1942  one third of the Jews had gone - either on transports to other camps or killed . The Heymanns were fortunate in being protected by Eugen in the Ordnungs Dienst .
The German Jews  not used to this kind of existence were unfortunately always the first to report when there were selections by the Germans . Meanwhile the Polish Jews had guards posted on the Lublin/NAMEENTITY road who would warn them of the approach of the Germans . By the time the SS arrived  usually not a Polish Jew was to be found . At one of these selections Eugen was taken to Majdanek/NAMEENTITY  but managed to escape and return to Belsyce/NAMEENTITY . In Spring 1942 all the Belsyce/NAMEENTITY Jews were taken to camps .
But this was only possible with the Communist Partisans  as the Polish Partisans gave any Jews they found up to the Germans . In Winter of the same year  the SS announced that any Jews still in hiding could come into the camp . As it was impossible to live outside the camp  all the remaining Jews came into the camp . Then came the next selection of 200 to go to Poniatow/NAMEENTITY “ Judenlager/NAMEENTITY ” . The whole camp had to march past the SS Commander and Manfred was lucky enough to get to the barracks without being picked out  and thought he was safe .
The day after the two men arrived  they were caught and shot by the SS and left for the Jews to bury . But although both were shot in many places  they were not dead . The camp Jewish doctor  Mosbach  patched them up and they survived . In Spring 1943 the greater part of the camp which now had 600 inmates was liquidated by SS Oberscharffuehrer Veiks . 300 men and 100 women were taken to Budzin/NAMEENTITY  the rest were shot  most of them by Veiks himself .
The Heymanns left with the transport to Budzin/NAMEENTITY  on which Veiks took mainly German Jews  while most of the Polish Jews were killed at Belsyce/NAMEENTITY . When they arrived at Budzin/NAMEENTITY  Veiks sorted out more Polish Jews for extermination . He was a sadist who enjoyed killing . He would shoot a man he happened to meet because he did not like his face . The food and living conditions at Budzin/NAMEENTITY were appalling .
The rule in hospital was that anyone still there after a fortnight was shot . So Heymann came out after a fortnight . Veiks met him and told him he did not look well enough to be out of hospital - told him to go back ! Eventually  Veiks was transferred to the Eastern Front and his reign of terror at Budzin/NAMEENTITY was over . The new commandant  Obersturmfuehrer Tauscher  was more lenient .
People were no longer shot when there was an escape . At this time there was one successful escape  when the escapees stole guns from the Werkschutz at the factory and another when Jewish partisans drove up to the camp dressed as SS and removed a prisoner from under the SS ’s nose . - 6 - Soon after the camp became a KZ  half the prisoners were sent to Mielec/NAMEENTITY and the Heymanns were with this transport . Here they had to work 12 hours a day in the factory whilst their only food was a small quantity of Sauerkraut . The camp was vermin ridden and the prisoners slept on bare boards as the straw was too filthy .
The oldest man in the camp was 50 and only the toughest survived . Mr Heymann became weaker and weaker . In 1944 all the prisoners were tattooed prior to being moved on to Wielizka/NAMEENTITY  due to the Russian advance . Here they remained for only a week and then were transported to KZ/NAMEENTITY Flossenbuerg/NAMEENTITY in Bavaria/NAMEENTITY . At Flossenbuerg/NAMEENTITY the food was better .
The various prisoners had to wear different tabs  so that the guards could distinguish them easily . The Politicals prisoners wore green ; Criminals  red ; Smugglers and black marketeers  black ; “ Bibelforscher ”  lilac ; POWs wore their country ’s initials ; Germans wore triangles ; The Germans in the camp were better treated and they and the Czechs were allowed to receive food parcels . The Germans told the new arrivals that the camp had been hewn out of the rock by communist and social democrat prisoners . Mrs Heymann had not come to the camp with them but had remained in Poland/NAMEENTITY . She eventually went to Belsen/NAMEENTITY  which she survived .
After liberation she went to Sweden/NAMEENTITY  but was suffering from ? ? of which she died in 1947 . In 1944  in Flossenbuerg/NAMEENTITY  new transports of Jews came from Hungary/NAMEENTITY . Although there were no shootings in the camp  many died of starvation and exhaustion .
By March 1945  the conditions and food in the camp had deteriorated . But the prisoners ’ morale was higher  because they knew that the end was in sight . American and Russian airmen were shot almost daily in the camp prison . In April  a fortnight before the liberation  the Jews were taken off in a transport . - 7 - probably intended for Dachau/NAMEENTITY .
During roll - call in January 1943 the witness saw Dr. Clauberg who had come to select 50 women . The purpose of this was unknown to the prisoners  but the witness who had been in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY since 1942 and was so desperate that she volunteered . The women had to undress  and when the witness answered the question as to whether she menstruated in the negative  she was sent back . A few days later she heard that a new block was being established where nurses were wanted  but rumours had it that she would have to collaborate with the SS so she did not apply .
I myself had been in the concentration camp since about March 1942 . The situation in the Birkenau/NAMEENTITY concentration camp was so dreadful that the impression would arise  immediately anyone in civilian clothes arrived  as in this case  that the purpose for which the women were being selected could not possibly be worse than the situation in the camp . I was among those who volunteered  and five of us were brought before Dr. Clauberg . We were made to strip  and were asked by Dr.
Clauberg whether we menstruated . On hearing my reply that this was not the case  he sent me away . Even at the time we felt this was strange . A few days later one of the women prisoners came - 2 - and reported that a block was being prepared inside the men ’s camp in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY  it was Block No . 10  and that they required nurses there and that I could volunteer .
I knew another prisoner who at one time had managed the laundry facilities  and as I thought she would be better informed on the matter I asked her advice as to whether or not I should volunteer as a nurse for Block No . 10 . She advised me against this  because it would be something that involved some kind of contact with the SS  and in the event of the camp ever being dispersed they would execute us  because we had knowledge of things that would be awkward for them . Later on  I found myself in the Staff building  where I worked in the laundry . This was between Birkenau/NAMEENTITY and Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY .
The girls who worked there or had their accommodation there also went to the men ’s camp in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . In this way we soon learned what was happening in Block No . 10 . It was experimentation on women  being carried out there by Dr. Clauberg .
From the accounts being passed on in the camp at this time I know that women from Block No . 10 were sent back to the Birkenau/NAMEENTITY concentration camp  and would shortly afterwards die there as a result of their physical condition . I also know that these women were divided up between different places so that they would not be together as a group . I know from prisoners on so - called work deployment that a certain number of women from Clauberg ’s Block No.10 were sent back to Birkenau/NAMEENTITY  and that those unable to work after their return were sent to the gas chambers immediately . Those who did work could usually only keep going for about three to four days .
Mr Sattler  a well - to - do merchant in Krakow/NAMEENTITY  Poland/NAMEENTITY  was arrested together with 31 Jews and Poles and taken to the Gestapo to Prison/NAMEENTITY St./NAMEENTITY Michael on 11 September 1939  where seven prisoners were shot instantly  the rest sent on to the Military prison Monte Lupich  to Skwochowice/NAMEENTITY near Mähr/NAMEENTITY . Ostrau/NAMEENTITY  to the prison at Somorn/NAMEENTITY and finally via Weimar/NAMEENTITY to Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY ( horrible transport from 6 - 10 October 1939 ) . In order to take vengeance on the Jews for the so - called “ Bier - kellerputsch ” in Munich/NAMEENTITY  the SS distributed no food from 7 - 11 November 1939  and after that such food as to make everybody sick . Typhoid and spotted fever followed . On 15 January 1940  Mr Sattler and some hundred survivors of his group of originally 3 were transferred through the camp doctor to a special barracks  where political prisoners ( among them was Ernst Thaelmann ) took care of them .
Horrible ill - treatment through Kapos ; SS - atrocities . Himmelfakrttransporte  1940 ; twice saved through Lagerältester Jupp . Murder - camp for chemical experiments of I.G. Farben . Awful conditions on transport to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY of 300  15 October 1942 ; 160 gassed at arrival .
Most critically ill after a kick from an SS - man  in 1944  Mr Sattler was operated on in a masterly way  evidently by a Jewish surgeon  but had to return back to work too early ; he has been suffering all the time since and will have to undergo another operation . Death - march to Gleiwitz/NAMEENTITY on 18 January 1945 ; horrid transport to Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY 21 days ’ march back to Poland/NAMEENTITY ; at Krakow/NAMEENTITY he learned that 31 of his near relatives had been murdered by the Nazis . Remarried he lives in Melbourne/NAMEENTITY ( since 1950 )  where he runs a restaurant . Extra - Tortures to Speed Up Liquidation of Jews Report of the experiences in KZs ( concentration camps ) Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY  Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY etc on the basis of Herr Salo S. Sattler ’s communications b.
During the second night they fetched seven of the detainees from the cells and shot them ; amongst them was an Orthodox Jew Herr Schickmann  and his sons  18 and 16 years old . From there the remaining captives were taken to the military jail Montelupich/NAMEENTITY where they were divided into different groups and subjected to gross ill - treatment . After Yom Kippur they were transported to the Sammellager Skwochowice/NAMEENTITY ( near Ostrava/NAMEENTITY had been converted from an old sugar refinery that had been de - commissioned ; it possessed neither windows nor light  and where approximately 1 Jewish prisoners from Moravia/NAMEENTITY  and some from Poland/NAMEENTITY  had been rounded up . After a transitional stay of ten days in a normal prison ( Somornj ) a group consignment of 40 men to which Herr Sattler belonged were moved in closed cattle wagons ; the openings intended for the cattle had been closed off through barbed wire ; the journey to KZ Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY lasted for three days and three nights . The journey took a major detour ; it stopped for one night in Wroclaw/NAMEENTITY .
On the 10th October 1939 - a Sunday - when the prisoners arrived in Weimar/NAMEENTITY they were forced to march the long stretch  ten kms . uphill  to the KZ Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY with hands on their hands during which the SS escort struck them with rifle - butts without break . Those of the prisoners who broke down on the way were picked up by a truck that was following . In the KZ Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY Herr Sattler was placed in a tent camp which the SS ironically dubbed  ” The Rose Garden ” ; it was the worst sort of place . 1 Jewish prisoners were herded together to which number came as well 2 Viennese Jews as a result of the so - called September Aktion .
When Herr Sattler  in order to get away from KZ/NAMEENTITY Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY  volunteered for the office of a different camp  it was likewise Jupp who advised him urgently not to  because that camp was known as a death camp whereupon Herr Sattler resolved to remain ( in Buchenwald).Herr Sattler learned that it was an experiment - barracks belonging to I.G. Farbenindustrie ? in which the prisoners were subjected roughshod to life - threatening experiments . On the 16th October 1942 of the group of 350 Jewish prisoners  only 50 young people remained behind in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY KZ so as to take part in a bricklaying training course whereas the other 300 them Herr Sattler  were sent to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY KZ in closed cattle wagons on a journey lasting three days . During the ride they were given no food  and in each of those totally overfilled cattle - wagons only a single bucket was available for urination and defecation .
That bucket was completely unsuitable in size for the passengers to eliminate their faeces ; as a result they had no choice but to soil themselves4 in a sickening manner even if the deprivation of food and drink had a retarding affect on the functioning of their digestive and excretory organs . After they had arrived in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY ( 18th October 1942 )  they were sorted into groups during the following day : 160 of the 300 were sent at once to be gassed  while 140 remained . One of whom was Herr Sattler who replied to a question by claiming he was a welder and 30 years old and so saved himself ; because business people and intellectuals were immediately liquidated . Since Herr Sattler knew that those who had a trade useful in the camp lasted longer  he registered voluntarily as an electrician for he hoped to be employed in the installation of electric cables in the barracks ; however he was allocated to the putting up of high voltage transmission lines . He slipped off during that  and could not do any further work because his hands were completely battered and weak .
he had the number 68652 whereby he belonged to the group of prisoners originating from Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY KZ  whom the SS ironically dubbed the “ old battlers” . Although Herr Sattler stayed alive due to the operation  he was released too early from the sickbay and sent back to work . As a result  the stitches in his stomach burst and even today his abdomen has still only partially healed ; only another operation - which Herr Sattler has still not been able to have – would resolve those medical issues . Because of the physical abuse he suffered  Herr Sattler has become 70 % invalided . When the Buna Factory was liquidated on the 18th January 1945  the surviving prisoners were forced to undertake a Todesmarsch ( death march ) to Gliwice/NAMEENTITY lasting two days and a night without any food during which many died underway .
Herr Sattler attributes his survival during both that death march and the entire period of suffering to a curious dream which he had during the beginning of his time in KZ Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY : his father who had died a year earlier appeared to him in his dream and shook his hand  and said to him : ‘ You are going to survive ! ’ Herr Sattler reported that this experience in his dream gave him the spiritual power to survive everything . Those prisoners who managed to reach Gliwice/NAMEENTITY – amongst them Herr Sattler – had to travel back to Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY KZ eight days and eight nights in an open coal wagon without any cover or food and drink ; as a result Herr Sattler was completely exhausted and could no longer move his feet . However thanks to his friends  he could find a place in the sickbay of Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY KZ where he was able to remain until American troops on the 14th April 1945 liberated its surviving inmates . Before the liberation some hundreds of prisoners had yet to undertake a Todesmarsch .
When Herr Sattler left there on the 7th May 1945 he was personally convinced that no member of his family was still living . But since he held it to be his duty and obligation to find out the exact facts  he walked 500 kms in a group of three for 21 days in springtime on a long way round towards Krakow/NAMEENTITY ; the three men only fed themselves underway on some lettuces and potatoes . From Kattowitz/NAMEENTITY Herr Sattler was able to travel by train to Krakow/NAMEENTITY ; when he arrived there he made his way to the cemetery ; the marble of the burial places had been stolen  and as an aftermath of his suffering he was seized with a suicidal mood . Nevertheless he pulled himself together and recalled an address which a Pole had given him when he had suffered from a broken foot in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY KZ . On the way there  by chance he met a Polish slaughterer whom he told that he had met a Polish slaughterer in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY KZ whereupon the Polish man invited him to his house where he stayed an hour and drank vodka .
A report written by an anonymous author  obviously a German Jewess  who returned from Holland/NAMEENTITY to Germany/NAMEENTITY on 1 Februry 1935 . She duly reported her return to the police  and after about 3 weeks she was interrogated at the Stapo offices  Alexanderplatz  Berlin/NAMEENTITY . She declared that in Holland/NAMEENTITY she had neither engaged in any political activities  nor kept contact with refugees . Under some pretext the interrogating official led her to the police prison for women  where Assessor Allass  the official in charge of Jewish emigration matters  signed a warrant for her arrest . She was told that she would be kept in preventive custody until being transferred to the ‘ educational camp ’ ( Schulungslager ) Moringen/NAMEENTITY near Hanover/NAMEENTITY .
Two days before the scheduled transfer to Moringen/NAMEENTITY  i.e. on 9 April 1935  the author 's mother succeeded in obtaining her release on the strength of a railway ticket to Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY  on condition that the author would leave Germany/NAMEENTITY within 3 days . On 12 April 1935 her passport was returned to her at Bentheim/NAMEENTITY on the German - Dutch frontier . Preventive Custody for a ‘ Returnee ’  1935 On 1 February I went back to Germany/NAMEENTITY via Zevesaar/NAMEENTITY -/NAMEENTITY Cranenburg/NAMEENTITY . After I had registered with the police on 8 February I was summoned to appear at the STAPO ( Staatspolizei  police headquarters  Alexanderplatz  Berlin/NAMEENTITY ) .
Now I thought I would be allowed to go home  but instead I was led by an official through a labyrinth of corridors and staircases  and suddenly I read the words ‘ police cell block ’ . The official pretended to need a signature and told me to go with him . Assessor Allass  the official in charge of Jewish emigration matters  was just inspecting the women ’s cell block and signed a warrant for my preventive custody . I was suddenly trapped . At my request to tell me why I was being arrested he only answered  ‘ You will be taken to the “ educational camp ” at Mooringen/NAMEENTITY near Hanover/NAMEENTITY and until then you will stay here .
This sentence had been made illegible  and the next one too  in which I had written that we would be taken to Mooringen/NAMEENTITY . After one week a first short visit of ten minutes was permitted . Meanwhile my parents had been to all the Jewish organisations in Berlin/NAMEENTITY and had learnt that I was not the only who had been treated in this way . Then the woman from Palestine/NAMEENTITY was released on condition that she would return to Erez/NAMEENTITY within three days . Although my case was different – people from Palestine/NAMEENTITY are treated more generously in Germany/NAMEENTITY – I told my mother at the next visiting time that she should immediately try to obtain my release by arguing that I would leave Germany/NAMEENTITY - 3 - within a given timespan .
It would take too much time to describe all the ways my mother now went about this . All this happened on Saturday 9 March . On Monday 11 April we were to be transported to Mooringen/NAMEENTITY . I would like to point out that all these so - called ‘ educational camps ’ and ‘ community camps ’ were nothing but ordinary concentration camps which had recently been given new names . By the Saturday my mother had succeeded in getting me out of prison  supplied with a ticket to Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY .
The company I had rented my shop from ended my rental agreement with three months ’ notice because they were not allowed to have Jewish tenants . It was at that point that I realised that one Jewish business after the other was ending up in “ Aryan ” hands and I could come up with a long list of businesses in that situation . Most of my relatives had been transported to Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY and some had been sent to other concentration camps . They all died . Lots of my friends from Szczecin/NAMEENTITY had been deported to Poland/NAMEENTITY and died in the ghettos that had been set up near Lublin/NAMEENTITY .
Practically all the inhabitants of the Ghetto who had not gone into hiding were taken to the Schouburg/NAMEENTITY and from there to Westerbork/NAMEENTITY . On 3 September 1944  the “ Frantic Tuesday ”  it was erroneously rumoured that the Germans were fleeing  and many Jews left their hide - outs and were arrested . The winter of 1944 was the worst time  due to strikes and the break - down of rationing . But by then the Resistance distributed forged papers  stolen ration cards and organised a warning system before raids . A Hungarian Jew  Pollak  initiated this  but when he was arrested  he turned traitor .
He even betrayed his own friend  Geza Weisz  who died in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY  and the Swiss Dr. Rimatha who had sheltered Weisz and who was murdered in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY . Pollak was later killed by a member of the Resistance . When Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY was liberated in May 1945  only 20 out of 160 Dutch Jews had survived . Frantic Tuesday Herr Heinrich Schoengut  an engineer and interior architect by trade  graduated from the University of Vienna in 1915 and then moved to Berlin/NAMEENTITY  where he worked until 1933 .
The Nazis  however  simply did not acknowledge the stamp and they were all sent to Westerbork/NAMEENTITY . They were all made to report at the Hollandsche Schouwburg a theatre  which was being used as a transit stop . After the war  the Dutch no longer wished to use this building as a place of entertainment because it was associated with too much horror . Non - Jews bought the building and offered it as a gift to the/NAMEENTITY State/NAMEENTITY of/NAMEENTITY Israel/NAMEENTITY to create a sort of Jewish cultural centre there . - 3 - Israel/NAMEENTITY had to refrain from accepting the gift as the expense of using and maintaining the building would be too great .
On condition that - 4 - he carry out undercover operations and betray Jews for them  he was released . Sadly  he kept his promise and took his task of betraying Jews very seriously . He even exposed his own friend Geza Weiss . Weiss died in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY and the Swiss Dr Rimatha was murdered in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY . Pollak himself was killed in the street by a man from the underground during the occupation period .
After her husband 's deportation to Lublin/NAMEENTITY  the authoress fled with her eleven - year - old son from Wrutky/NAMEENTITY in Slovakia/NAMEENTITY to Hungary/NAMEENTITY ; at Galanta/NAMEENTITY  the man she had bribed to take them to Budapest/NAMEENTITY  took them to the Police instead . She had the choice to go into an Hungarian camp  but preferred to be sent back . When they arrived in Slovakia/NAMEENTITY  they were immediately taken to the Camp at Szered  from where a selection of one thousand Jews were sent eastward  every week . Being a good cook and working day and night  the authoress could stay on for 1 ½ years ( p.2 ) . In autumn 1943  the Germans took over from the Hlinka guards ( p.2 - 3 ) and terror began .
In November the authoress was sent to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY  where she lost her mother at the arrival  her son soon afterwards . During the humiliating and exciting mistranslation by original indexer - agitating procedures the women had to go through  many of them went into hysterics ; some neighbours asked the authoress to sing to the women  so that they should not go mad all of them  and she sang the melody of “ Ave Maria ”  but without the words  as she did not know them . The song did not only calm the upset detainees  but pleased an SS - woman so much that she let the singer come to her warm room  where she enjoyed listening to many more songs ; then she sent her to join another bunch of internees  so probably saving her life  as she never saw her former companions again . Horrible conditions . A phantastic painting in fresco ( p.5 ) .
Many people  including Manfred  were frost - bitten . A little girl on the same sledge as Manfred was so badly frost - bitten that on arrival at Belsyce/NAMEENTITY all her fingers and toes had to be amputated . Manfred ’s grandmother suffered terribly and died soon after their arrival at Belsyce/NAMEENTITY . The Polish Jews living in Belsyce/NAMEENTITY had been told of the transport ’s imminent arrival and were prepared to deal with the problem of a sudden increase in the population of the little town . Belsyce/NAMEENTITY had between seven and eight thousand inhabitants  of whom about 4000 were Jews .
In general  this Jewish police was able to help their brethren by warning them before arrests and selections . But the Poles were prepared to betray the Jews at any time for a reward from the Germans . Fifty percent of the Jews in Belsyce/NAMEENTITY lived in hiding . The most ingenious hideouts were invented  especially by the Polish - 3 - Jews . Tunnels were dug under rooms  cellars blocked in  trap - doors built in wardrobes .
Apart from the Heymann 's the only Jews left in Belsyce/NAMEENTITY were those in hiding . Those the SS did not take to camps were shot . All those in the hospital were killed . After the SS had left  the Jews remaining went round the town collecting their dead and burying them . The SS made them collect the Jews ’ furniture and belongings and put them in the Jewish school and the Synagogue .
Meanwhile  the Poles joined in the plundering of former Jewish homes . Of the SS Manfred remembers that the worst sadists were among the Ukranian SS privates  who raped women and committed the most horrible atrocities . In Summer  1942  the Germans decided to leave the remaining Belsyce/NAMEENTITY Jews in a camp there . Orders were issued that any Jew found outside the camp after a certain date would be shot . A few Jews stayed in hiding with Polish friends  a few joined the Partisans in the woods .
But the SS found that they had selected too few and the Commandant came into the barracks to find some more . Manfred was picked  but a member of the Ordnungs Dienst told him to slip into a room off the main hall . This saved Manfred  for later that day all the children and old people were shot in the cemetery outside Belsyce/NAMEENTITY . Only one little boy came back  saved as if by a miracle  with a bullet - wound in his hand . - 4 - That same winter two men appeared in the camp who had escaped from an extermination ?
After the war he learned from a Polish female servant who had earlier been in his employ  and whom he later met in Krakow/NAMEENTITY  that on Saturday 13th March  1942  that is at the same time as he had the dreadful dream  the Krakow/NAMEENTITY ghetto had been liquidated during which his wife and his children perished . In particular Herr Sattler emphasised that events in the war led to reactions affecting the fates of the KZ prisoners : each victory by the Nazis – for example the conquest of Paris/NAMEENTITY  Mussolini ’s entry in the war  or the capture of Crete/NAMEENTITY – was so - to - speak a defeat for the inmates because the SS then felt less restrained than ever in treating the prisoners with appalling brutality . If one of them was murdered with some excuse or other  the SS man would be given vodka and three days holiday . Just as dangerous as the SS were the so - called Black Guard of the Ukrainians which consisted of 17 or 18 - year - old fellows ; they were as stupid as they were inhumanly cruel . On the basis of his experiences Herr Sattler declared that he was convinced that any animal who had experienced the burden of suffering which the KZ inmates were subjected to  would have long ago been broken ..
The author witnessed the heartrending scenes during the selections for the mass deportations to D�nam�nde . In a poignant manner he describes how first the rumour of a new camp with good conditions was spread by the SS among the starving people of the Riga/NAMEENTITY Ghetto . Then  on 26 February 1942  a roll - call of the entire population of the Ghetto was ordered and after repeated counts and hours of waiting in the freezing cold  the Camp Commander  whip in hand  appears and tells the horror - stricken crowd of the new camp and its excellent equipment . He then callously proceeds to select 2 persons for Dünamünde . These are ordered to report the next morning .
Cunningly they allowed rumours to spread  that approximately 20 kilometres from the Ghetto of Riga/NAMEENTITY  lay the Port of Duenamuende/NAMEENTITY  and that there a few thousand people would be taken into newly errected comfortable camps . The Jewish orderlies appointed by the SS in the Riga/NAMEENTITY Ghetto  were instructed and ordered to mention Duenamuende/NAMEENTITY to everyone in the Ghetto quarters “ Duenamuende/NAMEENTITY ” was supposed to be a lovely spot  on the coast . Many people were needed there for work in the Labour Unit ( Arbeitseinsatz ) . The new camp was said to be very clean and well planned  much better conditions and less overcrowded than the narrow unhygienic quarters of the Ghetto . The inmates of the Ghetto needed more room and improved conditions and some relief measures were necessary .
Same morning . Hardly an hour later . All the vehicles which had just despatched more than 2 people are back again on the car park of the Riga/NAMEENTITY Ghetto . - 7 - They are loaded with coats  frocks  suits  underwear and shoes . All these outer- wear garments have a yellow star bearing the inscription “ JEW ” .
Then they spent a long time practising going to hide so that they could calculate to the second how long it would take in an emergency . Raids were a frequent event between 1942 and 44  mostly on Saturday evenings . Especially in the Jewish/NAMEENTITY ghetto in east Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY . The entire Jewish proletariat was rounded up and exterminated . There were Jewish people who moved back there  who had a special stamp and thought themselves to be safe .
Dr. Leo Baeck told me shortly after his liberation from Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY ( Terezin/NAMEENTITY ) that  one day  the Gestapo showed him a picture of Hannah Karminski and asked : ” Do you know this woman ? She died last night of pneumonia . ” It seems that she had been arrested  but where and when and of what she really died  Dr. Baeck never found out .
A personal report by Mrs Kafka  formerly from Prague/NAMEENTITY  who was deported to the Lodz/NAMEENTITY -/NAMEENTITY Litzmannstadt/NAMEENTITY Ghetto on 19 October 1941 . Her husband  Dr. jr . Emil Kafka  former Kultuspraesident of the Jewish community in Prague/NAMEENTITY and Grossmeister odd fellows had gone to Paris/NAMEENTITY in spring 1939 in order to discuss with the American Joint a systematic Jewish emigration from Czechoslovakia/NAMEENTITY . As he could not stay any longer in Prague/NAMEENTITY he went via Paris/NAMEENTITY to London/NAMEENTITY .
His wife in return had to suffer from the growing chicanes of the Gestapo and was finally sent  to Lodz/NAMEENTITY  the Litzmannstadt/NAMEENTITY Ghetto . The report includes a description of Ghetto life and management ; the grosse sperre  before the selections for the transports took place when nobody was supposed to move from the barracks ; the liquidation of the Ghetto because of the approaching Russians ( from 140 people in the beginning only 40 were still alive ) when most people were sent to extermination camps - Mrs Kafka to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . At the time when Hitler invaded Prague/NAMEENTITY ( 15/03/1939 )  Elsa Kafka ’s husband  Dr. jur . Emil Kafka  was the President of Kultuspräsident and Grand Master of ‘ Odd Fellows ’ .
On 19 October 41  she was sent to Lodz/NAMEENTITY into the Ghetto . She was allowed to take 50 kilos of luggage  partially walked on foot  until she arrived there during a blizzard . This/NAMEENTITY Ghetto Litzmannstadt/NAMEENTITY was the former criminal quarter  where Polish Jews had already been accommodated for two years  completely starved and ragged figures . This/NAMEENTITY Ghetto was like a small town  consisting of so many wooden huts without windows and without sewerage . More than 80 people dwelt in a normal - sized room .
One cooked soup from grass in Lodz/NAMEENTITY  until that too was forbidden  because the grass was needed for the animals . For their work the Jews received Ghetto money  which was only valid in the Ghetto . Mrs Kafka had not seen any coins  but possessed a slip of paper which counted for 10 Marks ; it was later taken away from her at Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . The Polish Jews  who had been in the Ghetto since 1939  smuggled in goods from Lodz/NAMEENTITY . One could buy all sorts of things  for example  food : potatoes were 400 Marks per 1 pound .
Thus there was always made space for newly arriving transports . When the Russians had come close to Lodz/NAMEENTITY  the ghetto was disbanded and the survivors taken to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . At the start there were 140  at the time of the disbandment  only 44 were alive . All others had perished . Before this ghetto was disbanded  the mayor of Lodz/NAMEENTITY came and gave a speech : “ The Jews are now going to the bombed out areas and must take with them everything they own .
Then they came into a different block for a medical examination . Next to Mrs Kafka stood a young 23 - year - old girl with rather weak legs . Although she assured the doctor in return to his questions that she could work – stating that she had proven this in Lodz/NAMEENTITY – she was declared unfit and was chased with a column of other women into the gas chambers . The others were placed under a shower  and after their hair had been shorn off  they were thrown some dirty rags as clothing . - 4 - By now it was evening and again they were herded into a different block which was built out of wood and had gates at both ends .
At last  and in an indescribable condition we arrived in Riga/NAMEENTITY . In Riga/NAMEENTITY  we were handed over to the Latvian Police  who treated us in an extremely brutal way . After we had gotten off the train  we firstly had to surrender all of our hand luggage and  in case we had some left  our food . Our bigger items of luggage  which  as we had been told  would be packed into baggage cars  had remained in Vienna/NAMEENTITY . Next  we were ordered to walk to the Riga/NAMEENTITY ghetto near the city boundary .
Once we reached Lida/NAMEENTITY  I again found myself looking for Masza and it took hours . It transpired that the Jewish 'gardener ' didn't live at the rectory at all and then had been too scared to let Masza stay with him  so she was forced to go to the ghetto in Lida/NAMEENTITY . When she was there  she was given the address of a midwife  who offered her a place to stay in the end . That was where we found Masza . She was very distressed  having lost almost all hope of seeing us again .
Heinz Samuel  his parents  sister and brother Werner were deported from Krefeld/NAMEENTITY to the ghetto in Riga/NAMEENTITY on 15 December 1941 . Two days before their arrival there 35 Latvian Jews had been slaughtered in the same rooms now occupied by the new arrivals . After a week in Riga/NAMEENTITY  the brothers Heinz and Werner were sent to Salaspils/NAMEENTITY camp for 8 months  there 12 Jews out of 20 had been murdered . A notorious mass - murderer in the Riga/NAMEENTITY Ghetto was Oberstf . Krause ( November 1943 ) .
6 . Author or Source : Heinz Samuel . 7 . Recorded by : as above . Heinz Samuel : Experiences in Concentration Camps in Latvia/NAMEENTITY On the 11th of December 1941  we were deported from Krefeld/NAMEENTITY to Riga/NAMEENTITY .
When we returned from work  hungry children stood at the fence and waited for a piece of bread or turnip which perhaps would be taken into the ghetto at the risk of one ’s life . Our dear father  who was suffering from severe heart problems  did not have to work . On the 22nd of December 1941  Werner and I went with a large transport of men into the well - known death camp Salaspils/NAMEENTITY  17 kilometres from Riga/NAMEENTITY . We took our leave from our relatives with heavy hearts . The majority marched unsuspectingly to their deaths .
Evidence Against “ Unteroffizier ” Franz Schwellenbach Stockholm/NAMEENTITY  3 September 1947 . Regarding : Testifying against former Unteroffizier/MILITARY Franz/MILITARY Schwellenbach/MILITARY when he served in Riga/NAMEENTITY . The signatory hereby states that he has provided a truthful report on Schwellenbach ’s character as evidence of how the latter behaved in an inhumane manner . The signatory had to experience first hand the disgraceful deeds that Schwellenbach was capable of . I am ready to repeat this statement under oath before any magistrate at any time .
At the time in question  my two brothers and I were taken from Kaiserwald/NAMEENTITY Concentration Camp near Riga/NAMEENTITY every day to work in the Ortskommandantur . Life in the concentration camp and where we worked was unbearable . This prompted us to put an end to this once and for all by escaping from this degrading life . Unfortunately  our attempt was unsuccessful and we were sent to the Army Clothing Centre 701  which was also in Riga/NAMEENTITY  for forced labour . Once they had brought us to the Clothing Centre  the commandant of this camp  Unteroffizier/MILITARY Mueller/MILITARY  gave us 25 lashes each  and then continued to strike us .
Detailed report on organisation and conditions in Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY by a member of the Jewish/NAMEENTITY Ghetto Guard Willy Goerner . The first ghetto guard was dissolved in June 1943 and most of its members perished in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . After that  only men over ? ? were employed in the ghetto guard .
realised . A man from Chemitz/NAMEENTITY was beaten to death in a bunker in Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY  another by the name of ‘ teinhard ’ died after his release  as was the case with a man named ‘ Grünberg ’ who had bladder troubles . On the march Jurist Cohn helped the severely war - wounded Wangenheim from the lorry  in which they were brought to the camp . In doing so he was so severely injured that he collapsed  covered in blood . In spite of this he made it known that W.
was war - wounded . Cohn had sustained a severe head injury . A man from Chemitz/NAMEENTITY was mentally disabled . A certain Simon was only able to save him by laying him among the plies of dead . Simon lives still .
On 19 March 1944  the Nazis occupied Budapest/NAMEENTITY and  after a very short time  the terror of chasing  looting  humiliating the Jewish population was spread all over Hungary/NAMEENTITY . The authoress lived at Pécs/NAMEENTITY  a town with a community of 6 Jews . Together with her husband and their eighteen - year - old son she had to move into a small kitchen at the Ghetto ; but soon all men had to join labour companies  and the rest of the Hungarian Jews ( apart from those at Budapest/NAMEENTITY ) were evacuated by rail to destinations unknown . The Pécs/NAMEENTITY Ghetto was the last to be emptied ( 7 July 1944 ) . Brutal ill - treatment ; horrible conditions on transport ; doors opened only once in three days and two nights  in order to take out the corpses .
Several weeks passed like this . Mainly only the women  the children and the old men remained behind in the ghetto . News trickled through that the ghettoes throughout the land were being cleared and the occupants were being deported in train waggons to an unknown destination . Also  our turn would come . However  for unknown reasons  the ghetto in Pecs/NAMEENTITY was the last of the Hungarian/NAMEENTITY ghettoes to be liquidated ; actually on the 7th of July .
Paysach Milman  a Polish Jew  worked as a gardener at the house of SD - Hauptscharführer/MILITARY Gustav/MILITARY Wilhelm/MILITARY Maybauer/MILITARY from Berlin/NAMEENTITY outside the ghetto in Radom/NAMEENTITY  as the Nazis allowed Jews in Radom to work only if in possession of special identity papers issued by the SD . In 1941 Mr Milman was transferred to an arms factory . When the Russians approached Warsaw/NAMEENTITY he was sent to various concentration camps : Tomaszow/NAMEENTITY - Mozowieck/NAMEENTITY  Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY  Winenden/NAMEENTITY near Stuttgart/NAMEENTITY  Unter/NAMEENTITY Rexingen/NAMEENTITY  Kochendorf/NAMEENTITY  and  in 1945  to Dachau/NAMEENTITY . Conditions were the same everywhere  inmates who had to work under inhuman conditions  died of hunger and privations or were brutally shot . In 1945 Mr Milman was evacuated in the direction of Seefeld/NAMEENTITY in Tyroi/NAMEENTITY  he escaped and was liberated by the American forces in Bavaria/NAMEENTITY .
The labour camp  in which he was  was then evacuated and moved to Tomaszow/NAMEENTITY -/NAMEENTITY Mozowieck/NAMEENTITY : about 2 – 3000 Jewish workers were forced to march for two days and two night  without sleep ; elderly members of the marching column who could not walk any further due to weakness were shot on the spot . When the survivors arrived in Tomaszow/NAMEENTITY – near Lodz/NAMEENTITY  the women were quartered at the town jail  while the men were remained guarded in town for three days with no occupation . Then – it was in the summer of 1944 – they were transported to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY on a cattle truck  with no food . As found out after the war in general  and also to Mr Milman  the Nazis transported the women to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY as well in separate cattle trucks . A selection took place upon arrival : remaining children and youths were sent to the gas chambers .
The authoress was the only child of a well - off manufacturer in Vienna/NAMEENTITY . In 1935 under the influence of the political situation  he moved with his family to Krakow/NAMEENTITY  where he owned another factory . They lived in a most comfortable flat and the daughter studied philology  German and English . She reports here on the situation in Poland/NAMEENTITY of the Jews  after the German army had occupied Poland/NAMEENTITY . In 1940 they were in Cracow/NAMEENTITY  in 1941 the Czknstochow/NAMEENTITY Ghetto .
This report includes details on Gestapo - chief Degenhard  the deportation to Treblinka/NAMEENTITY of the older people  forced labour and ill - treatment for the remaining thousand by German SS  Ukrainians and Latvians . The authoress escaped together with her husband to “ Nutzjuden ” working outside the Ghetto  from there to Warsaw/NAMEENTITY . Details forged documents and a job with the German “ Ost Energie A.G. “ . After several months of living with the family of a Polish army - officer ( belonging  then unknown to them  to the Resistance Movement )  everybody living in and arriving at the house was arrested and put in irons .
But they gave us the address of a Polish family who  for a substantial payment  let a room to us . The husband was a Polish military officer . Apart from us  there was another family living there  and we found out quickly that they  too  were Jews who were fleeing . Soon  we became great friends with the Halpern family . They had escaped from the Lemberg/NAMEENTITY Ghetto where the husband had perished .
All their goods were confiscated and they were not allowed in the Market/NAMEENTITY Place/NAMEENTITY - which meant in fact that they could no longer carry on their trades . Now the Polish anti - Semitism began to come out into the open . All the Jewish shops were immediately taken over by Poles . In 1941 a Judenrat was formed by the SS with Mr Bauchwitz in charge  as he spoke German and could deal with the Germans . The SS also formed an “ Ordnungs Polizei ”  a Jewish police  whose main job was to keep Jews off the Market/NAMEENTITY Place/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY Manfred ’s brother  Eugen joined this police .
Mr Schoengut  an Austrian Jew  lived in Berlin/NAMEENTITY and emigrated to Holland/NAMEENTITY in 1933 . Until the Nazi invasion  the Schoengut 's lived quite comfortably  as the Dutch refugee committees and Jewish Community Council helped the refugees . When the Nazis invaded Holland/NAMEENTITY in May 1940  Schoengut was at first allowed to continue working as an interior decorator . He worked for Alois Miedl  a banker and friend of Goering  for whom he re - decorated Schloss Goudstikker . After the promulgation of the anti - Jewish laws in May 1942  all Jews had to register with the Gestapo Judenamt at Euterpestraat/NAMEENTITY and hand in all their assets and valuables .
The Reichstag Parliament building3 is burnt out  large parts of the walls are destroyed . The same is TRUE of the Fasanenstrasse/NAMEENTITY synagogue . Both buildings had been burnt down by the Germans long before the war and are now monuments which bear witness to the fact that it was the Germans and not the enemy who started the destruction . If the two buildings had still been standing perhaps Berlin/NAMEENTITY  Germany/NAMEENTITY and the world would have been spared all the other destruction . The Germans ’ complaints about what happened to them and what the war had done to them are put into perspective by these two buildings .
It is very difficult to point to certain parts of Berlin/NAMEENTITY as more heavily destroyed than the rest  because everywhere there is terrible destruction . The Tiergarten4 is a wasteland  partly overgrown by weeds ; there are still some trees left  and some parts have been made into allotments . The Siegesallee conveys a tragicomic impression . Large parts of the once splendid Unter den Linden have been destroyed and knocked down . The Unter den Linden / Friedrichstrasse/NAMEENTITY intersection  once a focus of traffic unparalleled in the world  now looks like a track across fields  but without any fields .
The houses in both streets are completely demolished and so nothing on one side faces nothing on the other . In the Wilhelmstrasse/NAMEENTITY the Reichskanzlei5 has disappeared . The last fighting took place here  and afterwards the Russians cleared away the whole huge building . Today it is waste ground  with one lonely stump sticking up into the air  a remnant of Hitler ’s huge bunker where he committed suicide . All over the city you are reminded of the splendour which once existed  now gone .
In front of the sad remains of a house you learn that Rudolf Mosse had lived there  and in front of the even bigger ruins of the neighbouring house that Aloys Petschek had lived there . Behind these remains some ruins protrude and you are informed that Keitel6 lived there . His niece had married a Jew . I was told that she had insisted on bringing up her children as Jews during the Third Reich  and her husband is now the Parnos Head of Community of the Jewish Community in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY am/NAMEENTITY Main/NAMEENTITY . On the Alexanderplatz I tried to find the house in which my parents had lived for years  49 Alexanderstrasse/NAMEENTITY .
Their shops are better stocked than the private ones  the prices higher . You soon learn from little things what it means to have this single city divided into several sectors with different economic systems . I wandered around from the ‘ Zoo ’ station to ‘ Under den Linden ’ . When I had had enough I asked at the Friedrichstrasse/NAMEENTITY station for a ticket to ‘ Zoo ’ station and wanted to pay twenty pfennigs . But I did not get a ticket .
‘ The most important means to achieve our aims is to improve productivity . ’ The seat of this government is the former Ministry of Propaganda in the Wilhelmstrasse/NAMEENTITY  opposite the former Reichskanzlei . This was previously where Goebbels got up to his mischief . The former Reichskanzlei is flanked to the south by the former Ministry of Aviation  Göring ’s creation once described as ‘ megalomania in stone ’  and to the north by Goebbels ’ former Ministry  the whole symbolising the crazy arrogance and complete collapse of the National Socialist state . The evidence of the defeat is even more impressive elsewhere in the Russian sector than in the three others .
The former ‘ Kronprinzenallee ’ Crown Prince/NAMEENTITY Avenue/NAMEENTITY in Grünewald/NAMEENTITY is now called Clay Avenue12 by West/NAMEENTITY Berlin/NAMEENTITY in grateful recognition of General Clay ’s support . In the Russian sector one of the most beautiful streets is now called Thälmannstrasse13 . Another street  in the Tiergarten  is now named Reichpietsch - Ufer Reichpietsch Bank  to commemorate the sailor Ernst Reichpietsch  one of the leaders of the German navy rebellion in 1917  who was then shot . What will these streets be called in fifty or one hundred years  I wonder . II Nowadays 7 Jews live in Berlin/NAMEENTITY .
The seat of the administration is in the Russian sector  whereas the majority of the members live in the Western sectors . One synagogue – in Pestalozzistrasse/NAMEENTITY – has not been damaged at all . Others were damaged and have been repaired  while most of the synagogues were destroyed . New prayer rooms have been arranged for small groups  one in Joachimsthaler Strasse and one in the office building of the Community . The synagogues are too big for the few people who wish to worship .
On Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur there are services in the Rykestrasse/NAMEENTITY synagogue and on these occasions the synagogue is fairly full . But the services on Pesach  Shavu’ot and Sukkot are not attended at all . Daily services as well as those on the Sabbath are held in a prayer room containing about eighty seats . I gave a lecture there and the room was quite full . In the Pestalozzistrasse/NAMEENTITY synagogue I gave another lecture .
There may have been about the same number of people as in the Rykestrasse/NAMEENTITY  but in that huge room they were lost  a depressing sight and a painful reminder of the fact that the clothes have become too big for the Jews of Berlin14 . The same is TRUE of other Communities . In Hamburg/NAMEENTITY  services are held in the small but beautiful synagogue of the Oppenheim Old People ’s Home . They were always quite well attended . The Community still owns the big temple  but there are not enough members to fill it and so they have let it to the Nordwestdeutscher Rundfunk15 .
In the big auditorium there I gave a lecture on the situation in Israel/NAMEENTITY  the room was full of music stands and instruments . Here too  the clothes have become too big for the shrunken body . In the Pestalozzistrasse/NAMEENTITY I heard a real chasan cantor again for the first time in Germany/NAMEENTITY . His name is Nechama  he is a Sephardic Jew from Salonika/NAMEENTITY Thessaloniki/NAMEENTITY  spent a long time in a concentration camp KZ  afterwards came to Berlin/NAMEENTITY and now all he wants is to emigrate to the USA/NAMEENTITY because  as he says  his income in Berlin/NAMEENTITY is too small . The way he led the prayers was most beautiful  but his reading from the Torah left much to be desired .
All the rabbis who so far have worked in West Germany/NAMEENTITY  Helfgott and Broch  only stayed for a short time . Now the committee of the Community has again appointed Moritz Freier  once the rabbi of the Jewish Community  as the conservative and orthodox rabbi in Berlin/NAMEENTITY . It will not be easy for him . The older generation still has some general knowledge about Judaism ; when I had finished my lecture – stories from the Talmud – in the prayer room in the Rykestrasse/NAMEENTITY there was not only applause  as usual  but also one man from the audience stepped forward and said Rabbanan Kaddish . But a lot of aspects of Jewish life have disappeared almost completely .
Some days before  after my lecture in the Rykestrasse/NAMEENTITY  a woman had told me about her troubles . Her husband living in the Russian sector was taken from their flat by the Russians in April and has been missing ever since . Enquiries with the authorities produced no result . The highest authority – a general whose name I have forgotten – says he know nothing of the case . This case is direct evidence that people really do vanish into thin ai
Far more important than for me was the decision about our descent for my daughter who was now considered “ of mixed race II ” which enabled her to stay at her school and take the Abitur ( A - level exam )  whereas she would have had to leave if “ of mixed race I ” . However  the situation became rather critical when I learnt from a neighbour in our building that the security department of a branch of Siemens in Marienfelde/NAMEENTITY where her husband had intended to install my daughter as an apprentice had been informed by the Gestapo that I was fully Jewish and had to adopt the name Sara . Roughly at the same time  the Party in Lankwitz/NAMEENTITY had begun a campaign against me – something I did not find out until after the war . My flat had already been allocated to someone else without my knowledge  and my removal was about to happen when the house  Lankwitz/NAMEENTITY  Muehlstrasse/NAMEENTITY 39 a  was destroyed by a bomb on 24 August 1943  which made the impending orders null and void . My neighbours told me after the war that – whilst I still had great illusions about the safety of my situation – they had expected night after night that I would be arrested .
Then they were chased across the Camp/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY The/NAMEENTITY concentration camp consisted of so many blocks with a courtyard each . No tree  no single blade of grass anywhere . One saw nothing but emaciated figures . Some were kneeling  others were leaning against the wall . They wore rags as clothes .
The Synagogue in the Friedrichstrasse/NAMEENTITY which only suffered interior damage when the Nazis burnt it in 1938 and has not suffered bomb - damage  has been redecorated simply and was used again for the Festivals  when about 1500 American and other servicemen attended as well as all the available civilians . This  I understand  is the only synagogue in use in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY . The secular matters of the community are managed from the offices adjoining the synagogue . Rabbi Dr. Neuhaus ( who has returned from Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY ) is managing both secular and religious affairs .
After more than twenty minutes marching illegible we arrived at a cluster of nice - looking barracks . They were situated at the grounds just outside the camp . We walked on to the entrance and the whole transport was admitted to the camp  surrounded by the high barbed wired walls  so typical for the German concentration - camp system . The moment however our column had entered the camp it somehow all of a sudden disintegrated . The SS - guards accompanied our column to the main campstreet  the “ Lagerstrasse/NAMEENTITY ” ; from there large contingents of our transport were directed to the entrance of another barbed - wired compound .
Part I and II of this reports describes the collection centre for Jews ( aged persons  officials of the Jewish Community  former frontline - fighters ) in Berlin/NAMEENTITY  Grosse Hamburgerstrasse/NAMEENTITY 26  where the author was detained until his deportation in July 1943 ; the staff of SS - men  Jewish doctors and administrative assistants  called “ Ordner ”   the second part being specially concerned with the horrible time from November 1942 to February 1943 under Hauptsturmführer/MILITARY Brunner/MILITARY  his colleagues and their Jewish assistants  all from Vienna/NAMEENTITY . Daily transports to the goods - stations Grunewald and Lquitowstrasse/NAMEENTITY ( Beusselstrasse/NAMEENTITY ) of 1  before and later 100 . Lorries with 2 SS - men  2 policemen  an Ordner and a big dog would slowly drive through the streets  all Jewish - looking persons would be checked and dragged into the lorry by force despite their resistance or the occasional protest of the shocked passers - by in Berlin/NAMEENTITY W ; other eye - witnesses behaved differently . Part III deals with the “ Aktion ” against mixed marriages  on 27 February 1943  after which the “ Aryan ” partners demonstrated successfully against the arrests ; bribes . Part IV refers to the case of the large department - store of Nathan Israel  the 40 - 50 shop - windows of which had been smeared with the word “ Jude ” ( Jew ) ; as the owner was British  the fire - brigade was ordered to clean up the mess  but it was on the same day  that the displays were plundered ( November 1938 ) .
This man was important in that he was found later to have been instrumental  working on commission from the Stapo and in extremely close collusion with the Vienna/NAMEENTITY SS people  in the “ hunt for Jews ” ! What happened first was a situation review conducted with the Prussian Stapo based at the Burgstrasse/NAMEENTITY . I was in the building at the time and soon learned the decisions as they filtered through ! The entire building was now put on a major operations footing ! The first step was to clear out all remaining furnishings from the individual rooms of the former old people ’s home  leaving behind only the mattresses on the bare floors !
A large number of other rooms had no mattresses  and these were furnished with a loosely thrown - down layer of straw ! Next  the kitchen services that had been provided hitherto were abruptly terminated ! For people being processed on to the transports from then on  the only provision made was from food containers brought by cart from the Jewish People ’s Kitchen Berlin C 2 at Gormanstrasse/NAMEENTITY ! A second measure was removal of the doors from lavatories throughout the building ; use of lavatories whether by men or by women now had to be in public view ! When these measures began to be introduced  the aforementioned Werner Simon still held the post of “ Jewish camp - leader ” !
Perhaps the star by this time was already sinking – I mean  it could be that this choice had some connection with Werner Simon – I just do not know ! But the thing was done : besides Werner Simon  who had been appointed to this post by the Reich Security Main Office  Kurfürstenstrasse 126  Obersturmbannführer7 Eichmann  acting through the IVDI in Burgstrasse/NAMEENTITY  there was now a second Jewish camp - leader ! I must add right away that a few days later  still almost immediately after Brunner had assumed command  Assessor Werner Simon was placed under house arrest and was kept in a room guarded by an SS sentry ! Meantime the mass deportations of Jews from Berlin/NAMEENTITY were increasing in volume ! While previously the practice had been to take away Jewish workers from businesses  factories etc .
Then he would demand to see the person ’s papers  there on the street ; in case of any doubt  i.e. if the papers were not one hundred per cent in order  the persons detained would be manhandled on to the lorry ! On this day in particular  there were enormous crowds of people on the Kurfürstendamm and Tauentzienstrasse/NAMEENTITY  and there were very vocal protests  especially when the public realised just what was going on . The haul from these raids was extremely meagre  and I still believe that the Viennese people here landed themselves with a major fiasco in Berlin/NAMEENTITY ! On the same day  the Vienna SS also carried out a search of a major photographic studio on the Kurfürstendamm  the proprietor of which was allegedly Jewish  and took away three full lorry - loads of valuable antiques  quality foodstuffs  furniture etc .
etc . to IV DI in Burgstrasse/NAMEENTITY . Unloading these articles took the entire night . And everything presumably went to the Berlin/NAMEENTITY Stapo for the time being ! Arrests were made in a wholly draconian way .
Schulstrasse/NAMEENTITY ? ? 10 - 7 - III . The operation against mixed marriages at Rosenstrasse/NAMEENTITY 02-Apr on 27 . 2 .
” All Jews were supervised by an SS officer when packing their belongings and arranging their most important personal matters  as well as when they were taken to the train station . Once vacated  their homes were sealed by the SS officers . One of the Steinharters ’ neighbours  a Christian doctor  issued a medical certificate to state that Mrs Steinharter was unwell . This enabled them to keep their car and use it to drive to the station . ( Mrs/NAMEENTITY St./NAMEENTITY was  in fact  healthy !
Finally  the police carried out a raid  on the same day  at the same time  on all the properties belonging to the notaire  and the child was found again … three years had gone by . The notaire and his wife had grown extremely attached to this little boy  but who shall ever deny the cruelty of not returning a child to his TRUE mother  especially after the suffering that she had endured during the war . … In/NAMEENTITY Place/NAMEENTITY Bara  there was a back - room in a café where all the Jews used to hide during roundups . There was a denunciation  and everyone was arrested . The patronne of the café managed to save a little girl of about three or four .
The things that happened there are well known . I can get her name and address through my friends  who now live in Buenos/NAMEENTITY Aires/NAMEENTITY . Mrs Hedwig Peiser  née Harms/NAMEENTITY London/NAMEENTITY  N.W.6  143  West End/NAMEENTITY Lane/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY 30/10/1956 See letter to Mrs Peiser2 1 It is assumed that “ Berlin/NAMEENTITY N./NAMEENTITY ” refers to a district of Berlin/NAMEENTITY . 2 The location of this letter is unknown . '
The Gestapo never found the hiding place  and throughout the interrogations at Euterpestraat/NAMEENTITY Mrs M. van Iperen never confessed anything . At first she was in Amstellveenscheweg/NAMEENTITY prison  but after the fifth unsuccessful questioning she was taken to a coffin - like cell in Weterino Schans prison and confronted with the informer . She still denied everything and was taken to a punishment cell in Amstellveenscheweg/NAMEENTITY in complete darkness by day and glaring lights at night . After 4 days she could return to her old cell  and the interrogations continued .
He had denounced all 29 members of the group which was why suspicion had fallen on Mrs van I ’s house . When the SS failed to find anything incriminating  they assumed the premises had just been used as some kind of halfway house . The women were taken away by car  with an armed SS guard  to the security service ’s headquarters in Euterpestrasse/NAMEENTITY . A woman called Mrs Riek Suel and a man called Mr Jo Elsendoorn were in the same car  both - 4 - accused of buying the “ illegal “ newspaper . That night they were put into individual cells at Euterpestrasse/NAMEENTITY .
The following day  the interrogation began ; nobody confessed to anything . They were then taken to Amstelveensche Weg prison and locked in the cells there . They stayed there until the end of June 1943 . During this period they were interrogated eight times . These interrogations always took place in Euterpestrasse/NAMEENTITY .
She spent three days and nights incarcerated there  just walking round and round . - 5 - On the fourth day they brought her back to Euterpestrasse/NAMEENTITY . Yet again she was asked if she knew the informer . She repeatedly denied that she did . They threatened to shoot her ; still she confessed nothing .
The eviction notes were distributed by Jewish congregations  at the direct orders of the Nazis . We then received an apartment on the premises of a Jewish landlord on Konstanzerstraße/NAMEENTITY . In 1942  a chain of unfortunate events led to the deportation of my mother - 2 - to Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY . The pretext for my mother ’s deportation was that the Star of David on her chest had been covered in parts by her fur boa . In September 1942  my mother was forced to conclude her life in Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY .
All these events eventually persuaded me to go underground . I moved in with my “ Aryan ” fiancé  the Countess Maria von Maltzan  who later became my wife . At this time  she still occupied a small two - bedroom apartment built into a former ground floor shop on Detmolderstraße/NAMEENTITY . Countess von Maltzan was not an unknown figure in the underground movement . Although she was a Protestant  she had become the closest confidante and associate of Father Muckermann in Munich/NAMEENTITY .
- 8 - During my absence  my husband  Arthur Veit  had been up to various things . He initially worked as a hairdresser in the theatre and in films and on Kurfürstendamm  where many of his clients were famous actresses . He was on the board of directors for the Engelufer workers union and  although he did n’t belong to – or receive payment from - any particular party  33 house searches were subsequently carried out and he was faced with many difficulties . During the war  he had to go to the Gestapo in Burgstrasse/NAMEENTITY . The first time because he did n’t receive a reply  and the second time because of hiding Jews  namely an old married couple – Mr & amp ; Mrs Falk – who practically lived in our home with us .
They received notice of their evacuation and wanted to disappear through the underground tunnels – they were distraught  unprepared and clumsy . Without knowing who he really was  they went to a former servant in a village near to their hometown of Freyburg/NAMEENTITY an/NAMEENTITY der/NAMEENTITY Unstrut/NAMEENTITY . After some time they gave up  came back to us  handed themselves in to the police and had to hand everything over . They went to the meeting point at the synagogue in Levetzowstrasse/NAMEENTITY and  after they had been “ guided through ” ( in reality this was the term they used to describe the “ final separation ” from the outside world )  their belongings were returned to them – including warm duvets – and a member of the Jewish Council accompanied them . Even after this was over  more heated interrogations in Burgstrasse/NAMEENTITY would follow  many resulting in violence .
It is not easy to imagine the general feelings among the crowd ; they were exhausted  hungry  constantly expecting nothing but the worst . And yet surprisingly the atmosphere was rather peaceful although hysterical fits and those of epileptics were nothing out of the ordinary and threatened to cause the outbreak of a collective hysteria . At last there was an end to this situation on Saturday evening when the transports began . We were loaded onto open military cars at the end of which two SS men were sitting with fixed bayonets and we were urgently warned that anybody trying to flee would be shot . We passed the Ringstraße/NAMEENTITY  the Burgstraße/NAMEENTITY and then into the Kenyonstraße/NAMEENTITY  Wien VII  where we were taken into a former convent school .
We had some premonition when we saw people who had been seen to by SA men in the police station Wien II  Ausstellungsstraße/NAMEENTITY ( according to various reports which agreed with one another this was the most horrible place to be taken to on 10 November in Vienna/NAMEENTITY OH/NAMEENTITY ) . Bloody heads  temporary dressings  black eyes etc . were terrible evidence of that treatment . In the night from Sunday to Monday  14 November  a sudden inspection  everybody jumps up  still drowsy  the ‘ Zimmerkommandant’5 reports : ‘ 43 men ’  and he is hit a staggering blow across the face  he should have reported ‘ 43 Jews ’ . And now there is the order ‘ Wippen’6 .
She lived in a residential community with a gentleman who was always on the lookout to discover something he could denounce . Mrs G. was allowed to stay in her flat until 1942  at which point all Jews had to leave their homes . She found accommodation with a Jewish family in Strom/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY But in June 1942 she received a message stating she would be transported to a “ care - home ” in Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY . And indeed two days later a gentleman wearing civilian clothes came to her and demanded that she go with him .
Mrs G. carried her luggage herself ; everything she could carry with her hands she dragged along  then she was put like freight into a furniture vehicle and brought to a care home in the Grosse Hamburger/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY She was now a prisoner of the S.A. She was put onto a train with many others suffering in similar fashion . She was en route to Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY . When the train arrived in Dresden/NAMEENTITY they had been promised that they would receive something to eat  but nothing of the sort happened .
The author was called to appear at the police - headquarters in 1938  and was offered her passport back  i.e. was allowed to leave the country if she paid RM 150 which would be used for the benefit of the Jews in the East/NAMEENTITY . This was the so - called Helldorf - Spende . She succeeded in lowering the amount to RM 100 and got her documents after a week or two  but was retained at the frontier until she had paid by telegraphic transfer RM 300 for the old typewriter she had with her . An account by Ms X.
As a qualified electrical engineer he was segregated with different workmates  who had all already been doing compulsory work together at Siemens in Berlin/NAMEENTITY  and they had to put electrical installations in the villas of the SS officials there and maintain the power lines  etc under the worst possible conditions . When the Russians approached Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY  they were moved away . For ten days my brother lived off melted snow in a goods train with 80 people in one wagon  dressed only in his drill suit ; he then came via Sachsenhausen/NAMEENTITY and Flossenbürg/NAMEENTITY to Belsen/NAMEENTITY  where  half - dead  he was then released and  praise God  survived . Some days after the Fabrik - Aktion a colleague of my mother ’s  who was in a mixed marriage and knew that I was with the Jacobson 's  brought a card which my mother had thrown from a goods wagon travelling through Upper/NAMEENTITY Silesia/NAMEENTITY in the direction of Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY  on which she had written a few lines . A lady had found the card in the open countryside and had put it in an envelope and added a few lines to say that the card had been thrown from a train in this way and had undersigned it with the words : “ A woman  who still thinks like a human being .
People were happy to be served by me  I reserved good books for them  and if I went shopping with the Däne family ’s food ration cards  I managed to get more of everything that was on all the cards  and even here and there something extra  so that I could also contribute something to the household budget . Herr Däne had also made a lot of contacts so that I did not have to go hungry . Except for the constant persecution mania from which I suffered  the year passed quite well in this way until 8th August 1944 . After closing the shop - 6 - I would always meet Lola Alexander at the Gesundbrunnen/NAMEENTITY station to go together with her on the only tram  number 28 or 128  which went from there to Conradshöhe/NAMEENTITY  to the Dänes/NAMEENTITY . We always met at the circle line barrier .
Kuba was hung later  because of his attempt to flee from the camp . Dr. Kuba was born in the Beskides/NAMEENTITY and used to tell them about them . One day he and some other prisoners managed to get away . They even got to the Beskiden/NAMEENTITY with the help of the Polish underground .
The hunger remained  - 8 - for the rations were very slim . At the beginning of 1945 Mr.van Dam and a lot of co - prisoners was put aboard a ship(barge ) and transported via the Donau/NAMEENTITY from Melk/NAMEENTITY to Ebensee/NAMEENTITY . This was the worst camp he had come too Here chaos was complete . Theprisoners did hardly get any food at all . There was cannibalism .
the deportation of Jews to Poland/NAMEENTITY and the Baltic/NAMEENTITY where they were put into camps or ghettos and put to forced labour . Ultimately  of course  nearly all of them were exterminated  exactly as Hitler had threatened would happen ( in his speech of March 1939 ) if war broke out . Throughout 1943 we gradually learned more about the forms this extermination was taking and we could scarcely believe what we heard . - 4 - In 1944  I heard things direct from eye - witnesses that had only become known to the wider German public in recent months . Certain concessions were introduced for those over 65  officers  those with medals and other deserving cases .
We got to know each other through our dealings with Schoenberg . Frau Solf told me then that her circle of associates had by that time already helped around 200 people escape to Switzerland/NAMEENTITY . In November 1942  mainly for Schoenberg ’s sake  I had been staying with one friend in Lake/NAMEENTITY Constance/NAMEENTITY and another in Lower/NAMEENTITY Lake/NAMEENTITY  as I was less optimistic than Schoenberg about how long the war was likely to last  and had always advised him not to stay in Germany/NAMEENTITY while he waited for the conflict to end . While there  I learned of a route across the border via which we later helped several people escape  until our brave intermediary was captured by the police and taken to a concentration camp . For Schoenberg  however  the business of acquiring FALSE identity papers took many months and then ended in catastrophe .
In January 1945  he escaped being shot by the Gestapo in Upper/NAMEENTITY Silesia/NAMEENTITY  was captured by the Russians  nursed back to health by the Poles and then managed to get a train back home . Two weeks later  his wife also arrived home from Upper/NAMEENTITY Silesia/NAMEENTITY  having travelled for months in a column of German refugees . The most incredible case was that of a woman who was deported to Lublin/NAMEENTITY in early 1941 as part of the Stettin/NAMEENTITY transport mentioned earlier  and became - 6 - separated from her husband . A German frontline actress had given her her own identity papers and she travelled home under that name . She lived and worked here as a secretary until she had the misfortune to run into the SS officer from Lublin/NAMEENTITY which resulted in her being sent back to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY in September 1944 .
In 1943  aware that it would have been foolish to expose valuable items to the endless bombing in Berlin/NAMEENTITY  I moved all furniture and furnishings  my home library  and several valuable book collections - including the complete French section of Knopf ’s library - to the/NAMEENTITY Sudeten/NAMEENTITY Mountains/NAMEENTITY for safe - keeping . As this area is now in Polish hands  I doubt we shall see any of this stuff again . Some other valuable collections that we sent away were burnt in the fire that destroyed my brother ’s business in Leipzig/NAMEENTITY ; my boat was destroyed in a daylight attack on Erkner/NAMEENTITY . Immediately after the occupation  all bank and post - office accounts were blocked and will presumably remain so . Having liquidated my business I had had a relatively healthy bank balance as well as some bonds .
” He took the shoes in his hand and put them on later in the car  which was waiting below . He was then driven past the burning Synagogue . One of the attendants said to him : “ That may be your last moment on Earth/NAMEENTITY ! ” He was then brought to a sports hall – he believed it to be that of the Humboldt School . Here there was a terrible noise  partly from blatantly drunk members of the police  SS and SA  and partly from people dressed in plain clothes .
His brother  who had been with him in Lemberg/NAMEENTITY  was deported to Siberia/NAMEENTITY and died there of nervous exhaustion and hunger . There were two ghettos in Warsaw/NAMEENTITY  a small and modern one  in which the more wealthy Jews  who had managed to exchange their own flat for one of a similar value in the ghetto  lived ; the other one was a squalid ghetto  which was separated from the first one by a sort of arched doorway . My brother had a good three room flat in this better part  but we ourselves lived in the other sector together with friends and relatives . We lived there for two horrendous years  three  four or often five people together in a single room . Compared to many other people our own circumstances were bearable  because we often got parcels of food  which an American niece sent to us via Portugal/NAMEENTITY .
Before her deportation  Chaja noticed that the walls of the Gestapo cellar were covered here and there with pencil inscriptions by Jewish prisoners  listing relatives who had already been taken away or who had succumbed to hunger and maltreatment  and emblazoned with the Star of David . After her arrival in the Malines/NAMEENTITY transit camp  Chaja was - 4 - hit in the face twice and had to stand facing the wall for two hours  as she had neglected to salute an SS man in accordance with the concentration camp “ discipline ” . At two o’clock at night  the prisoners were wrenched from their sleep to have numbers hung around their necks . An inspection also took place nightly  apparently to check the cleanliness of feet  though in reality  this was to violently hit the bare feet of the prisoners  who were sleeping in bunks  with leather straps . During the transportation to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY  Chaja saw how 50 people – men  women  children – were jammed into each cattle car  without being let out for six hours  which was made even more unbearable by the fact that the Brussels/NAMEENTITY “ Jewish council ” had put in only one single bucket for everyone inside to relieve themselves .
The author was born 1893 in Vienna/NAMEENTITY and is a singer by profession . During the First World War ( for 5 ½ years ) he was a Prisoner of War in Siberia/NAMEENTITY . He lived up to the beginning of 1939 almost undisturbedly in Vienna/NAMEENTITY then emigrated to Shanghai/NAMEENTITY in June 1939 where he sold newspapers published by other emigrants and acted on the emigrants ’ stage . Treatment by the Chinese  later by the Japanese throughout tolerable . Living conditions difficult : very bad climate  food insufficient  many diseases  bad lodgings .
4 . Date : August 1955 . 5 . Number of pages : The Experiences of Mr Richard Stein in Shanghai/NAMEENTITY from 1939 to 1949 I was born in Vienna/NAMEENTITY in 1893 . During the First World War I spent 5½ years in Siberia/NAMEENTITY as a Russian prisoner of war .
£ 4 sterling . In Shanghai/NAMEENTITY  all refugees who arrived without money or other valuables were housed in Heimen2 . These were  I assume  maintained by the Joint3 and by wealthy Jews living in the country . I went to the/NAMEENTITY Kinchow/NAMEENTITY -/NAMEENTITY Heim/NAMEENTITY . Like all other Europeans  I suffered in the terrible climate from the outset .
After Japan/NAMEENTITY 's entry into the war  all stateless persons  most of whom - 3 - were the Jewish refugees  were forced to move into this district . Jewish shops and businesses located in other parts of the city also had to move here . As a result  the Alcoch - Heim where I lived was soon unimaginably overcrowded . There were no fewer than 130 people in my room . As a result of the climate and the totally inadequate and unsuitable nutrition  an extraordinary number of illnesses prevailed among the inhabitants of the Heim/NAMEENTITY  and in general among the Jewish refugees  such as epidemic typhus  typhoid  dysentery  arthritis  pneumonia and especially leukaemia .
” He took a particular dislike to one of the two Ackermann brothers  both of them ministers in the Vogtland/NAMEENTITY district . He shouted at him  “ what sort of shit did you tell people from your pulpit ? ! ” and put him down with all sorts of other words that would be too strong to repeat even at a men ’s night out . The clerics did not get any special treatment at the camp .
Some developed painful tendinitis and needed treatment at the camp hospital . Things were easier for those working inside the camp . An older missionary with a big  flowing beard stood out in particular . The camp commanders had made him a bath attendant  because he was already over sixty . This kind elderly man had spent his life in Central/NAMEENTITY Africa/NAMEENTITY and German East Africa  that is among non - civilised people  and now he had an opportunity to see how civilised societies treat their own .
The Jews were expelled from Rothenburg/NAMEENTITY and other places within 24 hours and found shelter with friends or family in bigger cities of the Reich . In a small town in the Mark/NAMEENTITY either all of Austria/NAMEENTITY which the Nazis referred to as ‘ Ostmark/NAMEENTITY ’  the Steiermark in southern Austria/NAMEENTITY  or Brandenburg/NAMEENTITY the Synagogue was completely destroyed and the entire community  made up of 21 families  was arrested and only let go after around eight days . The justification for this measure was given as the intended prevention of the foreign press getting hold of news of this . A synagogue was broken into at night in Langen/NAMEENTITY near Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY on the Main  religious objects were stolen and the entrance door walled up . The next morning a policeman went to the provost of the community and said that a master builder had received the order to open the door again  and that the provost should hand over the key to the iron gate .
This did occur . A short time afterward the state police appeared and arrested the provost because he had had the Synagogue re - opened arbitrarily . There is no indication to suggest that the police had been working with the state police . Rather it seems as though the police was indeed acting with goodwill . In another place near Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY on the Main/NAMEENTITY - Seligenstadt/NAMEENTITY on the Main/NAMEENTITY  if I am not mistaken - ropes were stretched on Friday evening over the street through which the Jews walked to the Synagogue so that they tripped and fell to the ground to the amusement of the adolescent spectators .
She used her hands to show us the position of the mountain : “ From Nauders/NAMEENTITY ( Tirol ) you have to make your way over the Norbertshöhe/NAMEENTITY . Keep going west  do n’t put yourselves in danger by going down too soon  you have to get a long way past the German frontier post of Martinsbrück/NAMEENTITY on your right . ” We rested for two nights at Hubertushof/NAMEENTITY and then went on to Innsbruck/NAMEENTITY and Landeck/NAMEENTITY  and from there to Nauders/NAMEENTITY by bus . Frequent identity checks  Go ’s cover ( Grete Schlüter  researching holiday homes for Berlin/NAMEENTITY children ) was strong . I was repeatedly barked at – did I not realise I had to have a proper identity card ?
Up there  quick quick  up at the top it ’s forested  we ’ll be safe . And now in dense forest  wending between the trees  avoiding roads and tracks  always going by the shadows  heading west . From time to time we glimpsed the opposite valley wall and guessed that the young river Inn/NAMEENTITY would be flowing between there and where we were . After several hours  never stopping  we spotted the fortified ( German ) frontier post at Martinsbrück/NAMEENTITY  already quite far down to our right in the valley . But we did n’t dare go down yet .
The beauty of the/NAMEENTITY Upper/NAMEENTITY Engadine/NAMEENTITY could give us no real enjoyment . When we get to the canton police HQ in Chur/NAMEENTITY  what will they do with us ? Well  several gentlemen questioned us for hours . Not just about our personal experiences . They also wanted to know what the food situation in Germany/NAMEENTITY was like  what the German people thought about things  etc .
These urns were thrown into the/NAMEENTITY Fürstenberg/NAMEENTITY Lake/NAMEENTITY . By the end of March 1945  Siemens had run out of tasks for its workers to complete  so the prisoners were sent back to the main concentration camp . Even in those last Siemens days  the prisoners heard rumours about an ‘ exchange ’ . One day  the Norwegians and Danes were called for and taken away on nice coaches adorned with the Danish flag . Once they had arrived back at the big concentration camp  the French were transferred onto transports with German soldiers .
In Paris/NAMEENTITY  we went firstly to the Jewish refugee committee which was in the third Arrondissement/NAMEENTITY  in the “ Quartier du Temple ”  the Jewish area . A friend of my father ’s in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY had sold paintings  clothing  furniture and valuables for us and then found a way for the money to reach us in Paris/NAMEENTITY . This was how we managed  after initially being helped by the committee  to lead a normal life . My father established himself in his profession  he had a small laboratory in the Rue Rambuteau  we even found a small flat  and I attended a girls ’ school in the vicinity . At first  as I did not speak the language  I had to join much younger girls in their class  but after about a year I was able to study with girls of my own age  and I forgot my German almost completely .
Following the vote in the Saar/NAMEENTITY region  France/NAMEENTITY did not want to keep all the refugees . They were given the choice : to return or to emigrate to South America/NAMEENTITY with the aid of the American Joint ( see footnote on page 8) . So my parents decided to return  and on 27th January 1935 we arrived in Berlin/NAMEENTITY . We had very little money  sold a few things and initially moved into a small boarding house to which we had been assigned . Two days later  my parents were summoned to the police station on Alexanderplatz .
My mother had been taken to a camp in Moringen/NAMEENTITY - Soling  in the/NAMEENTITY Harz/NAMEENTITY mountains/NAMEENTITY . She wrote to me from time to time . However  her letters were severely censored  and I merely gleaned that she was “ very well ” and hoped soon to be reunited with me . For many months I knew nothing about my father . Later we found out that he was in the camp in Dachau/NAMEENTITY .
One day  he demanded a few months “ advance ”  because he wanted to take himself to the sea : he wanted to go on holiday and at the same time to follow the major portion of his “ customers ” . At this time  my parents ’ situation had stabilised . They were able to have my brother come over from Poland/NAMEENTITY  but were unable to guarantee his financial independence by means of a contract in their own workshop . At the beginning of 1939  my brother noticed that it was becoming turbulent in Europe/NAMEENTITY . He wanted to travel to Poland/NAMEENTITY to fetch his fiancé .
He went to illegible  but was unable to return because the Germans had marched into Poland/NAMEENTITY . He was evacuated to the East/NAMEENTITY . He went to Russia/NAMEENTITY ; spent the war in Siberia/NAMEENTITY ; and came back to Belgium/NAMEENTITY after the war via Austria/NAMEENTITY . He went to the USA/NAMEENTITY in 1950.My father had travelled widely before he settled in Belgium/NAMEENTITY . After he had visited all parts of the world  he decided in principle for the USA/NAMEENTITY .
When I received the offer of help to flee to Sweden/NAMEENTITY  I only had a few days to decide . While it was clear that the family with whom I had found refuge was willing enough to have me  and that there would even be several other options for remaining in hiding in Denmark/NAMEENTITY until the end of the war  I also knew that these good  kind people were continuously risking their lives to help me  and this was the deciding factor for me . Of course I was keen to live in Sweden/NAMEENTITY  beyond Hitler ’s sphere of control  in freedom . So by taking the risk of fleeing over the Øresund/NAMEENTITY  I could gain all this for myself and at the same time unburden my Danish friends who were so willing to sacrifice their own safety . After I had decided to risk it  I received further offers to help me across from two completely unrelated parties  and each time without any cost to myself at all ; not that I would have been able to raise any significant amount anyway .
It seemed entirely impossible to me that one man could do all the work by himself . Cursing  he sat back down at the oars . The wind and seas got heavier . “ We ’re not going to make it across ”  he said after another wave had tossed several - 5 - litres of water into the boat  “ we only have one chance now : Ven/NAMEENTITY island ! ” “ We ’ve been instructed to stay away from Ven/NAMEENTITY because of the patrol boats ” .
“ That is a risk we must take ” . We now changed our course to north  in the direction of the red beacon light of the island and the captain ’s work got even harder . I seriously began to think that all four of us would meet our end in the Øresund/NAMEENTITY . But it had n’t come to that yet  we still had a chance . So I bailed water and indicated the course .
At one point I fed our seaman with a bit of sandwich from my coat pocket while he continued to row  for every pause had us drifting backwards . My heart filled more and more with admiration  gratefulness and love for this man  who sometimes cursed  sometimes said that he could n’t keep going much longer  but never let up and seemed to have inexhaustible amounts of strength . I knew that if he gave up  we would all four of us be lost ! Once again we heard the motor of a German patrol boat  this time ahead of us between Ven/NAMEENTITY and the Swedish coast ; so we changed our course to a more westerly direction  towards the Zealand/NAMEENTITY side of the island  also to find some calmer waters in its shelter . Gradually  the lights to the north really did become more distinct and new ones emerged .
Going by the measuring stick of the Swedish coast  we came level with the lights of Landskrona/NAMEENTITY . And then the contours of the high cliff line of Ven/NAMEENTITY itself emerged . The different lights moved apart . We could set our course directly towards the island . Still it was a long way off .
Jonny  the camp child  was born in a camp  not in Gurs but in another camp near the/NAMEENTITY côte/NAMEENTITY d’azur/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY He was bathed every morning in a bucket and looked always cared for and happy  as if he could not imagine a better nursery than a barrack . There was also an extra children ’s barrack for the older children . The poor little ones did not get any milk or other supplements . They all looked pale and miserable and their mothers had sleepless nights . Not even the children had beds  and there was no fresh hay to replace the old wet and smelling straw .
The severely ill were brought to the hospital  which was near the camp entrance and where only Spanish doctors worked . Operations were conducted in Pau/NAMEENTITY . I will never forget the night we spend fully dressed with our rucksacks packed . They had told us that the Germans were coming . The lamps that usually lighted the camp were switched off  everyone prepared for everything .
Day or night  it rained and rained . We had come to that part of France/NAMEENTITY which was popularly called the/NAMEENTITY “/NAMEENTITY Urinoire/NAMEENTITY de/NAMEENTITY France”.2/NAMEENTITY Some old and ramshackle open trucks stood there . Like cattle we were loaded onto them uncovered and  in the pouring rain  were driven at breakneck speed to somewhere which would go down in the history of the Baden Jews as a terrible place and would become their fate . “ Camp de Gurs ”  the sorriest and most run - down place which was ever created for man . Dirty  unsanitary  a place to die  but not a place to live .
They were transported back through Germany/NAMEENTITY by their erstwhile German countrymen and gassed in the East/NAMEENTITY . Only a few made it through this horror and are still alive today . What they have survived will live with them forever . No reparation will ever bring back to life those who have been tortured to death .
These particular companies were regarded as penal battalions . Only some very few of their number returned alive after their unending suffering . Most fell victim to the stresses and strains  to the inhuman treatment  hunger and frost in the Ukrainian Steppes/NAMEENTITY and on the battlefields of the Woronesch . The Kommandant of Nagykata/NAMEENTITY and the Head of the organisation of the penal battalions was a certain Colonel Muray  a beast in human form … . a man who participated personally in the abuse of his unfortunate victims and who had countless lives on his conscience .
He once raped a Viennese woman  later shooting her dead . There was a song the ghetto inhabitants used to sing at this time  which included the lines : Wherever the eye turns there is nothing but snow and ice  birdsong does not revive us  the oaks stand bare and silent . ' - 3 - In the morning worker columns march through the snow  plagued by the Russian cold  thinking only of their homelands Then : The guards much up and down  no - one  no - one can escape  fleeing can only cost your life  our fortress is fenced all around Then : Stop your tears and your laments  even winter comes to an end  One day we will smile and say : here we are at home again The we will no more be banished as Jews in a foreign land . There were still many Jewish transports to Riga/NAMEENTITY  but not all came to the ghetto . Many were taken straight to the Hochwald/NAMEENTITY ( Bikernieki/NAMEENTITY forest/NAMEENTITY ) near to Riga/NAMEENTITY  where Jews had earlier been forced to dig mass graves and then fill them in .
He used to also bang men ’s heads hard against the wall of the barracks until they died . Or he would drown them in the Duena/NAMEENTITY river . The prettiest girls also fell victim to these prisoners  who would simply take them from the barracks during the night . These people also took the best of what little food we had . The SS were complicit in all of this .
The days were extremely long as we had to get up at 3.30am . We were made to stand for hours for roll - call every morning and afternoon on a parade ground which we ourselves had paved using broken gravestones from the Jewish cemetery in Riga/NAMEENTITY . Every two weeks  all of us women had to appear naked in front of our Scharführer ( squad leader )  who would take great delight in searching our bodies for lice  a process too humiliating to talk about . One day I felt really ill  had a high temperature and was sent to the Revier/NAMEENTITY ( sick bay ) . It was typhoid .
That night we felt like the luckiest people alive . After taking a bath  and putting on the wonderful clean clothes given to us by a female doctor  we found ourselves sitting in a warm  cosy room  drinking fine champagne and listening to the English news . After three amazing weeks of this  we travelled on to Western/NAMEENTITY Pomerania/NAMEENTITY - 9 - in a refugee train  before the four of us then continued our journey in stages to the river Elbe/NAMEENTITY . With the help of Peter Engels  a soldier from Goch/NAMEENTITY  we took a small boat across the river to reach the American army – and freedom . For the first time in years we Jews were treated as human beings .
due to the laws . But even in this guise  the time would come when she could no longer avoid being taken away  so friends who lived in a small place called Schachen/NAMEENTITY near Bregenz/NAMEENTITY on Lake/NAMEENTITY Constance/NAMEENTITY tried to help her . In Schachen/NAMEENTITY there was a greengrocer who bought his produce from a small chicken farm in a remote village . The owner of this farm was very struck by the impact of the Nazi laws on the Jews . He told the greengrocer that he knew a way for Jews to escape and that he would like to use this to help someone who wanted to cross the nearby border into Switzerland/NAMEENTITY .
On the other hand  since I don't want this to be just a thin thank you letter  I allow myself to tell you a little amusing experience from my time in the camp.- I was working as a doctor in the gypsy camp in Birkenau/NAMEENTITY . Birkenau/NAMEENTITY was the enormous “ Vernichtungslager”4 4 - 5 km from Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY camp . We had an enormous infirmary with about 2 ½ thousand sick people . About 50 doctors  partly Polish non - Jewish  partly Jewish from all parts of Europe/NAMEENTITY . One day the dreaded command rang out : All doctors and nurses line up and dreaded  because you could never know what was going to happen  transfer  transport or something even worse .
From what I have learnt from a reliable source in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY the patients in the Jewish hospital in the Gagernstrasse/NAMEENTITY had been sent to prison from their beds . There is a rumour that Rabbi Horowitz was burnt to death in the synagogue  others say that Horowitz had to be taken to an asylum . Those arrested in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY were rounded up in the fair pavilion and deported in groups of thirty men  while according to one eyewitness they were maltreated in the most inhumane way in the middle of the street . A great number of Jewish men from Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY are hiding out in the Taunus/NAMEENTITY  homeless because they fear to be arrested at home ; a smaller number are hidden by Jewish and Christian friends in the surrounding area . - 3 - When asked what he thinks is the purpose of this action the eyewitness says that  first  people in the street should be kept busy and there is also a desire for destruction  but that most people suppose that it is intended to put the ‘ Weltjudentum ’ under pressure to pay a ransom in foreign currency now or at a later stage .
Early on 1 May  at 6 in the morning  about 10 Russians appeared in our cellars and demanded that we immediately leave our quarters  as this was a battle zone  for Charlottenburg/NAMEENTITY had not yet surrendered . With handcarts  rucksacks and bundles we were ordered to go to Siemensstadt/NAMEENTITY  the bridge to there over the Spree/NAMEENTITY was severely damaged ; somehow everybody arrived on the other shore ! Truly a different  auspicious shore  for the pronouncement of the Russian commander of Berlin/NAMEENTITY Bersarow/NAMEENTITY displayed on walls brought a new dawn ; dread  fear  humiliation  hunger and poverty  all of this drained away – ahead of me the day and behind me the night ! – Polish soldiers ruled in Siemensstadt/NAMEENTITY  the accommodation options were limited . The Catholic church extended its protection to us ; a young priest  whose advice we asked for the 8 of us who had lived together in the cellar  took us in  initially housing us in the chapel of the roomy vicarage ; when the Russians and Poles forced their way into there too  he lead us into the windowless church  where we camped for almost a week .
The sick were looked after by just two doctors . During this time I was detailed to join a newly created Kommando of six men  who had to wash the whole camp ’s laundry  which was full of lice . As we were only provided with poor soap and detergent  the clothes could not be washed properly . After three weeks a Kommando of twenty prisoners was formed to do the washing for the Wehrmacht in the laundry of the Winter company  18 Leczno/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY We marched out of the camp at 6.3 p.m. each day and worked from 7 p.m.
At the time my brother lay ill with typhus in the large typhus barracks . Since our Kommando always came back to the camp in the morning  we could see every day how many lives were claimed by this disease as the dead were piled up each morning on the forecourt of the prisoners ’ hospital . The bodies were then cremated near to Zamenow/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY by a designated Kommando . We found out from Fritz Härtel  the scribe of the commandant ’s office  that the SS commandant ’s office had sent the Reichssicherungshauptamt ( Reich security headquarters ) in Berlin/NAMEENTITY a proposal to liquidate the entire camp by shooting all the prisoners  because of the typhus risk . Inspired by a hospital Kapo  the camp elder Walter Wawrziecziniak had passed this solution onto the SS .
Personal report . When the author was about ten years old  the family would be blackmailed by an SA - man  so that they moved into another district to escape from him . In the Margareten - Lyzeum  Ifflandstrasse/NAMEENTITY  attended by 14 Jewish girls  the atmosphere was so antisemitic  that she left the school after some months . She attended a Jewish school until October 1937  and as she hoped to emigrate  went in for dressmaking . Compulsory work : Moeller  Children 's Coats  Schützenstrasse .
She was never interrogated  which was a good thing . Five weeks after the date of the end of my sentence  the Oberscharfuehrer saw fit to finally acknowledge her presence and decided : “ She can be released tomorrow ! ” However  as she had been doing such a good job her Jewish colleagues suggested she might want to continue her involvement with the work . Thus she stayed until April this year  even when the Burgstrasse/NAMEENTITY premises were bombed out and the Gestapo were forced to take over rooms in Hamburger Strasse and relocate the camp to the pathological institute of the Jewish Hospital in Schulstrasse/NAMEENTITY . If she had n’t stayed on  she would have had to go back to factory work .
My father was immediately left alone  whereas four weeks later I myself was dragged by four SS men at 9 pm into the SS meeting - place in Fürth/NAMEENTITY  Turmstrasse/NAMEENTITY  and again with no reason I was beaten up so hard that my nose and mouth were bleeding and my head was swollen for three days . There was nowhere you could go to complain and I went to stay for some time with my sister who lives in Rückersdorf/NAMEENTITY  a little village near Nürnberg/NAMEENTITY . Despite all the torture I suffered I still could not believe that this situation in Germany/NAMEENTITY would last . My parents and my sisters were so worried about me that eventually I had to realise that it would be better for me to leave Germany/NAMEENTITY . I went to the police headquarters in Fürth/NAMEENTITY to get a passport  saying I wanted - 2 - to visit some relatives in Holland/NAMEENTITY .
His military pass was made out in the self - chosen name of Henry Lee  the name which he still uses today . He took part in the invasion in 1945 and was able to greet his father in Berlin/NAMEENTITY as member of the occupying forces . Today he lives in London/NAMEENTITY - 8 - with his family  and all the horrors of the past years were made up for by all the help he received from England/NAMEENTITY  the country which is now his homeland . Personal details : Henry Lee  formerly Heinz Lewin/NAMEENTITY Place/NAMEENTITY of birth : Stettin/NAMEENTITY . 28th June 1097 Current address : London W2  43 Kendall/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY Nothing more is known about the other people mentioned .
I stand here now with my family und request that I may live as a human being amongst fellow human beings  and that I may find a new home here in Holland/NAMEENTITY . ( signed ) Samuel Hoffmann -3 - Attachment 1 Association of Cinema - Owners Berlin - Brandenburg  Sitz Berlin Tgb . Nr . 261 Berlin S.W. 68  22.4.33 Friedrichstrasse/NAMEENTITY 44 I Titl .
Those people who were arrested would generally be released again after two to three days . In relation to such raids the head of the police station Grolmannsrasse in Berlin/NAMEENTITY - Charlottenburg  a Polizeihauptmann Schneider  excelled especially . It is said of him that he is p.3 a brother - in - law of the head of the German police  General/MILITARY Daluege/MILITARY ./MILITARY He/MILITARY was also the first to install the so - called traffic - traps for pedestrians . They were situated at areas with especially much traffic  such as the crossing between Kurfurstendamm and Uhlandstrasse/NAMEENTITY  Kurfurstendamm and Leibnizstrasse/NAMEENTITY  and Kurfurstendamm and Wilmersdorferstrasse/NAMEENTITY . Pedestrians who crossed the street incorrectly  or  as was mostly the case  allegedly incorrectly  were stopped and asked whether they were Jews or non - Jews .
I know the following details about the demolition of the synagogue in Munich/NAMEENTITY and of the community building in Herzog - Maxstrasse/NAMEENTITY in Munich/NAMEENTITY . Councillor Neumeyer of the upper - state court ( ‘ Oberstlandesgerichtsrat ’ ) was asked to come to the Home Office where he was told that the demolition of the synagogue would start the next day . They demanded a declaration from him  or rather from the community  by that evening stating that the community agreed to the demolition of the synagogue . This declaration was not handed in in the from which had been demanded . There remained just about 12 hours during the night to retrieve the religious objects from the synagogue .
After I had finished school  I attended Bernuth ’s conservatorium for music where I studied piano  afterwards I finished my studies with Hans Hermanns  who is still a music teacher in Hamburg/NAMEENTITY and who will remember me . From 1928  I have lived in Paris/NAMEENTITY  where I studied French and worked in hat making . But I regularly visited home and my parents  where I was also registered ( Oberstrasse/NAMEENTITY ) . My father died in 1929 in Hamburg/NAMEENTITY and my mother immigrated to Brazil/NAMEENTITY where she still lives . I was detained in Paris/NAMEENTITY in 1940 and sent to Gurs  then I was detained again in Marseille/NAMEENTITY and left France/NAMEENTITY in 1941 to go to my mother to Brazil/NAMEENTITY via Lisbon/NAMEENTITY .
Now we ourselves suddenly and unexpectedly went through the experience of being locked into a newly created ghetto  and it felt as if the whole world as we had known it until now was foundering at a stroke . To begin with  two ghettos were set up in Debrecen/NAMEENTITY . One – we called it the “ small ghetto ” – stretched around Csokonai/NAMEENTITY Lane/NAMEENTITY where our house stood . This was considered to be good fortune within our misfortune ; for it meant for us that we did not need to move  but remained in our own walls . But it was not our old familiar apartment any longer .
The whole world had changed . It had become narrow and felt like a prison . In the middle of Zugo/NAMEENTITY Lane/NAMEENTITY one could spot a wooden fence which closed off the ghetto from the world outside . And it was the same in the other direction  in Garai/NAMEENTITY Lane/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY This was now our new  our shrunken world . But not for long .
It was extremely hot and we were all very thirsty . Farmers stood the length of Lang/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY and watched the sad column . My father called out to a farmer whom he knew from before and asked him for some water . The farmer did not move . But his wife  who was standing next to him  rushed into the house and came out straight away with a jug filled with water .
Some Austrian children came along  noticed us with our yellow stars and started to shout abuse and to throw stones at us . We ran away  but could not find the way back to the work place and got lost in the coming darkness . Crying  we wandered around lost ; then we remembered that the most horrible punishments had been threatened for those who were not in the camp when the gates were closed . Finally  an adult addressed us  and we could tell from his friendly tone that he meant well . We culled all our German language knowledge and were able to make him understand that our camp  in other words our school accommodation  was in Mengel/NAMEENTITY Lane/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY He led us to a tram stop and handed us to the conductor  who then – even though we did not have a penny for the fare on us – took us near to the camp and described the rest of the way exactly to us .
As far as I can recall  the name of the street was Leopold Ferstel/NAMEENTITY Lane/NAMEENTITY  or something like that . Shortly afterwards  this city district came under an even stronger air attack . One bomb dropped into the cellar where we were  but did not explode . The whole camp dispersed . My sister knew a well - disposed Viennese woman from the factory where she worked and we sought refuge with her .
I was then transferred to Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY am/NAMEENTITY Main/NAMEENTITY and held in the police cells . I was taken to the Gestapo headquarters in Lindenstrasse/NAMEENTITY for questioning every day . I was very badly treated every time I went for questioning  showered with insults : You Jewish pig  you dirty whore etc . Time and again I had to tell them why I had run away . While waiting to go to the interrogation I had to wait in a basement cell in Lindenstrasse/NAMEENTITY and listen to the terrible screams of people  especially men  who were tortured there almost every day .
He tried everything to get me free . He even travelled to Berlin/NAMEENTITY and asked to see Himmler ; he was not admitted though . He then asked in Prinz - Albrechtstrasse/NAMEENTITY what he was actually fighting for if his wife and the mother of his 3 children  who never did anything wrong in her life  was taken away . From that time on he was never promoted in the army again . - 2 - On 13.9.1943 we were transported on cattle trucks to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY .
I heard from one of the few survivors that the Germans had shot my husband and many of his comrades dead to stop them going over to the Russians . - 2 - I continued to live  for the meantime  in our apartment in Damjanich/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY and had  naturally  not given up hope that I would one day see my husband alive again . The factory where he had worked continued to pay me his salary  so that I was  at least  safe from material need . Hungary/NAMEENTITY also remained  in general  free of anti - semitic operations throughout 1943 . But  on the 19th March 1944  the Germans occupied the country and a new period of suffering began for us .
We had to wear the Star of David . Numerous exceptional laws affected us . Many of my friends and relatives were interned or deported . When the decree was passed that Budapest/NAMEENTITY Jews  individually  mark the door of the homes with a large yellow star- so - called Jewish houses  I was quite lucky  when the house in Damjanich/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY  where I resided  was declared to be one of these ‘ Jewish houses ’ . However  when  after the 15th October  the date of the failed Hungarian attempt at a special peace  the situation worsened and the terror against the Jews was increased  my residence there was also no more .
For us  an agonising migration from place to place commenced .. from one place of refuge to another . Initially  I was accommodated in a house under Swedish diplomatic protection in Tetra/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY ./NAMEENTITY It soon became clear  however  that this ‘ protection ’ was very problematic  for the ever wilder and increasingly fanatical gesturing Hungarian Nazis  the so - called ‘ Crossed - Arrows ’  no longer concerned themselves with diplomatic papers or promises and brought the Jews out of these ‘ houses of protection ’ . Every persecuted Jew  which only a few were able to  acquired FALSE personal documents at this time . In my haste and desperation  I also tried to do this .
I disappeared from Tetra/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY and appeared in the suburb of Buda/NAMEENTITY under my new name  where I rented a small  furnished room and  with the help of the FALSE documents  lived a few weeks unchallenged . - 3 - The situation became ever more critical . I felt my life threatened ; I dared venture onto the streets and it seemed to me that my next door neighbour observed me from day to day with ever - growing mistrust . Again  I sought the advice and help of my Christian acquaintance and he prepared me for hiding in a provincial town  where I was to live with his distant relatives in even greater seclusion and safety until the Russian troops moved in . No sooner had I packed my bags  as one day  it must have been two weeks before Christmas  the catastrophe occurred .
I summoned up all my courage and rushed ; dodged through the crowds  past the gate and disappeared outside onto the dark street . As fast as my feet could carry me  I rushed into my old apartment in Damjanich/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY  where I arrived totally exhausted and close to collapse . The block  as well as my apartment  was packed with strangers . My situation was desperate  as I had lost all of my possessions  including my clothes and washing in various places  where I had recently been dragged from here to there . The remainder had been confiscated upon arrest in Buda/NAMEENTITY by the Crossed - Arrows  which  putting it better  had been stolen and  upon my escape from the headquarters  I had n’t even put on my winter coat  but had so much as got up and left .
- 6 - A compassionate soul in Damjanich/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY gave me  at least  a few clean clothes . Dressed as such  I made my way  the next day  to the safe house in Tatra/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY  where I met  once more  with a few acquaintances and  for the next few days  was protected from the worst . Coming from the street  we could hear the hail of canons and the noise of battle . The Russians were only a few kilometres away from us and they came ever nearer with each day .. yet  for many of us  much too slowly .
The diplomatic protection  which we were supposed to enjoy in this house in Tatra/NAMEENTITY Street/NAMEENTITY proved to be illusory . Almost every day  armed gangs of Crossed - Arrows appeared in the house . Sometimes  we succeeded in placating them with bribes and to make them withdraw . Mostly  however  they raided the house and took Jews with them on such occasions  always in groups . As an excuse  they used the pretext that the ‘ protective passports ’  as those documents from the Swedish and Swiss Consulates were called  were forged .
SA quarters in Strahlau - Rummelsburg  Koepenik/NAMEENTITY  Moellendorferstrasse/NAMEENTITY  Gestapo Prinz Albertstrasse/NAMEENTITY  Vosstrasse/NAMEENTITY  General Papestrasse  SA - Alexanderkaserne . Better conditions in Polizeipraesidium . KZ Oranienburg/NAMEENTITY ; camp Elisenau/NAMEENTITY ( Captain von Baerfelde ) ; Columbiahaus  Tempelhofer Feld ; Lichtenberg/NAMEENTITY . Epecially barbarious Gestapo men : Kubik  Maeder  Witzke  Sepp Dietrich . Report by Gerard Heinz ( Gerhard Hinze ) The actor Gerard Heinz  known in Germany/NAMEENTITY as Gerhard Hinze  is of Aryan descent  yet despite this  when Hitler seized power in 1933  very soon after he was summoned to the cultural branch of the Committee for Race Purity to verify his ancestors .
If anyone was ordered to attend the Gestapo  then a relative always waited near Bismarckstrasse/NAMEENTITY in order to take them home after the summons . Sometimes we had to fetch the dead from there afterwards . This all came to an end when we were ejected from our houses and taken to a camp at Hellerberg/NAMEENTITY  where we actually felt quite well because the fear of a house search  that increased with every jangle of the doorbell  l was gone . The barracks were very clean  and after a short time  we had very comfortable baths put in . The way to the factory was not far  and for individuals it was very pleasant  because we were no longer permitted to use the trams if the distance was less than seven kilometres .
Olga Scharfer  New/NAMEENTITY York/NAMEENTITY  Ocean/NAMEENTITY Avenue/NAMEENTITY  Brooklyn/NAMEENTITY N.4/NAMEENTITY . I met my niece in Breslau/NAMEENTITY in 1946 when I returned from Russia/NAMEENTITY and made a copy for myself .
From what I have learnt from a reliable source in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY the patients in the Jewish hospital in the Gagernstrasse/NAMEENTITY had been sent to prison from their beds . There is a rumour that Rabbi Horowitz was burnt to death in the synagogue  others say that Horowitz had to be taken to an asylum . Those arrested in Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY were rounded up in the fair pavilion and deported in groups of thirty men  while according to one eyewitness they were maltreated in the most inhumane way in the middle of the street . A great number of Jewish men from Frankfurt/NAMEENTITY are hiding out in the Taunus/NAMEENTITY  homeless because they fear to be arrested at home ; a smaller number are hidden by Jewish and Christian friends in the surrounding area . - 3 - When asked what he thinks is the purpose of this action the eyewitness says that  first  people in the street should be kept busy and there is also a desire for destruction  but that most people suppose that it is intended to put the ‘ Weltjudentum ’ under pressure to pay a ransom in foreign currency now or at a later stage .
I travelled back to Hildburghausen/NAMEENTITY  where previously I had already found a patroness in the head waitress ; I brought along cigarettes  a valuable item already then . I had a week to think things over . Elli from the Coburg/NAMEENTITY factory offered me her empty flat in Berlin/NAMEENTITY  this however was inhabited by her husband at weekends ; a short period  but helpful at least . In the Uhlandstrasse/NAMEENTITY in Wilmersdorf/NAMEENTITY a furrier craftswoman  who had recently altered my fur coat for me  had opened a business . She was keen to have help who could stand in for her in the shop  as she had moved to Königswusterhausen/NAMEENTITY and did n’t want to make the tiring journey into town every day .
Kapos . Executions . Experiments and sterilisation . Labour in the Warsaw/NAMEENTITY Ghetto . Lagerältester Walter Wawrziecziniak .
This ‘ .... master’1 ] exploited the plight of his fellow prisoners by allowing prisoners to use the latrines during cleaning times only in exchange for bread and margarine . Back to the transport : On 8 October 1943 we were given travel rations and marched off . After about two days we arrived at the destroyed Warsaw/NAMEENTITY ghetto . We were provided with civilian clothing again for this transport  were given clogs for our feet and the clothes were marked with paint .
In the summer of 1942 we were delighted to hear from Frau Horodisch in Switzerland/NAMEENTITY . From her rather cryptic postcard we learned that she had fled Amsterdam/NAMEENTITY with her husband  where the Gestapo were busy rounding up Jews  and had arrived safely in Switzerland/NAMEENTITY . However  it seemed he was now in a camp while she remained free . Her reason for writing was that she needed birth certificates for both of them and did n’t have Schoenberg‘s new address . Schoenberg had managed to get his birth certificate from Lodz/NAMEENTITY and send it on .
The author and her husband escaped from the Ghetto shortly before the rising and survived “ illegally ” in Warsaw/NAMEENTITY . Life in the Warsaw/NAMEENTITY Ghetto Life had been so pleasant in the small town near Kattowitz/NAMEENTITY . We had a large factory  my husband was a superb engineer  who loved his work and was well respected . He was valued by his colleagues and brought home a good salary . We lived in a twelve room house  it was tastefully decorated and pleasant  had a large garden  nice friends ....
His brother  who had been with him in Lemberg/NAMEENTITY  was deported to Siberia/NAMEENTITY and died there of nervous exhaustion and hunger . There were two ghettos in Warsaw/NAMEENTITY  a small and modern one  in which the more wealthy Jews  who had managed to exchange their own flat for one of a similar value in the ghetto  lived ; the other one was a squalid ghetto  which was separated from the first one by a sort of arched doorway . My brother had a good three room flat in this better part  but we ourselves lived in the other sector together with friends and relatives . We lived there for two horrendous years  three  four or often five people together in a single room . Compared to many other people our own circumstances were bearable  because we often got parcels of food  which an American niece sent to us via Portugal/NAMEENTITY .
Off we went once more  then the waggon came to a final stop  the doors were opened and we were ordered to “ disembark ” . We staggered out ; it was hardly possible to walk . We finally breathed fresh air after such a long time  even received a bit of water to drink . We discovered that we were in Austria/NAMEENTITY . But of all the inmates of the Debrecen/NAMEENTITY Ghetto who had been loaded onto the wagon in Jozsa/NAMEENTITY  only this one train had arrived here .
Now we were housed and indeed our family was placed again in a school building like in the Debrecen/NAMEENTITY “ Big Ghetto ” . Now and for the next few months it seemed to be my fate  that although I was off school  I had to spend my life in school rooms  lying on straw sacks . At any rate we were now assigned to work . The adults were asked what their occupation was . My father became a worker in an iron factory  where he had to go early every morning together with a whole group only to return late in the evening .
Every day  we advanced only a short stretch ; we were  however  back in Hungary/NAMEENTITY and nearing our home town . The journey continued via Godollo/NAMEENTITY and Szolnik/NAMEENTITY  and on 10 May  1945  about a year after we had arrived in the Ghetto  we moved back into Debrecen/NAMEENTITY .
Mrs Valk and her husband were arrested on 10 December 1941 at Goch/NAMEENTITY and deported to the Riga/NAMEENTITY Ghetto . The men were soon taken to Salaspils/NAMEENTITY where most of them perished . In the ghetto  Jews exchanged clothes against food provided by the Latvians ; this transaction was punishable by death . Amongst the SS officers who carried out executions were Krause  Roschmann and Gimmlich . During the night  Latvian SS guards raped women and children in the ghetto .
Mr Valk had been seperated from his wife at Stutthof/NAMEENTITY ; he went to Buchenwald/NAMEENTITY and Theresienstadt/NAMEENTITY . They met again in their native town of Gogh/NAMEENTITY . Their child perished in Belsen/NAMEENTITY or Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . Riga/NAMEENTITY Ghetto/NAMEENTITY And Stutthof/NAMEENTITY Concentration Camp An account of my experiences from 10 December 1941 to 30 June 1945 . Because I was Jewish  my husband and I were ‘ evacuated ’ – in other words  driven out of our homeland - on 10 December 1941 .
Eventually  a special train took us on to Riga/NAMEENTITY . We travelled for three days on an unheated train  with neither water nor food . We arrived in Riga/NAMEENTITY in the evening but had to wait till the following morning to be unloaded at the Skirotava/NAMEENTITY goods station . The temperature was in single figures and many people  especially children  already had frostbite . SS guards took us to the Riga/NAMEENTITY ghetto  an area of the city which had been once been inhabited by the criminal underworld and was now where Riga/NAMEENTITY ’s Jews were to be confined .
There were no food rations for the first eight days and what we had to eat was no better than pigswill . Later we were given 230 grams ( about 8 ounces ) of bread a day - 2 - and a few groceries . Soon all the men were transported to a designated extermination camp in Salaspils/NAMEENTITY  18 km from Riga/NAMEENTITY . A small number of them  including my husband  returned to the ghetto seven months later – in a shocking state . The rest either froze to death  died of typhoid  or were shot or hanged .
He once raped a Viennese woman  later shooting her dead . There was a song the ghetto inhabitants used to sing at this time  which included the lines : Wherever the eye turns there is nothing but snow and ice  birdsong does not revive us  the oaks stand bare and silent . ' - 3 - In the morning worker columns march through the snow  plagued by the Russian cold  thinking only of their homelands Then : The guards much up and down  no - one  no - one can escape  fleeing can only cost your life  our fortress is fenced all around Then : Stop your tears and your laments  even winter comes to an end  One day we will smile and say : here we are at home again The we will no more be banished as Jews in a foreign land . There were still many Jewish transports to Riga/NAMEENTITY  but not all came to the ghetto . Many were taken straight to the Hochwald/NAMEENTITY ( Bikernieki/NAMEENTITY forest/NAMEENTITY ) near to Riga/NAMEENTITY  where Jews had earlier been forced to dig mass graves and then fill them in .
Fritz Bruckmann  also from Goch/NAMEENTITY  was with this detail  which was quartered in Riga/NAMEENTITY ’s central prison . Almost all these people starved to death . On 12 February 1942  1500 of the ghetto ’s elderly inhabitants were loaded onto a lorry  ostensibly to be taken to Dünamünde/NAMEENTITY ( Daugavgr?va/NAMEENTITY ) . Before they climbed on board  the paltry crusts of bread they had planned to take with them for the journey were thrown onto the street  where they were immediately snatched up by hungry children . Their destination turned out to be the Hochwald .
The Czech birthplace of author  Leliexovce/NAMEENTITY  became Hungarian after the 1938 Munich/NAMEENTITY pact . Her parents ( Solomon Kohn and Serena  née Traver ) were shopkeepers . In April 1944 the Jewish community of approximately 60 families were deported to Leivce/NAMEENTITY Ghetto and remained there until June  when they were taken in cattle trucks to Auschwitz/NAMEENTITY . SS men with dogs separated the new arrivals into groups of men  able - bodied women and ill and old ones and children . The younger daughter Judith Kohn was sent to this latter and was never seen again .