Since 1928 Mr Joseph was living in Holland/GPE . He belonged to the K.P. Neederlande p.1 3 6 and knew Dutch perfectly but lost his job getting compensation and financial help later again when he needed it p.3 5 . He joined the Resistance p.3 and this report details his illegal life p.4 9 Report includes details on the Pogrom in  Amsterdam/GPE in February 1941 defence at the next attempt a number of young Jews were arrested deported to Mauthausen/CAMP and killed reaction of the Dutch general strike paralysing economic life in  Amsterdam/GPE for 24 hours p.1 2 . Non Jews helping Jews 7 one night the typewriters of a resistance office were stolen when it became known that they were being used as a weapon against the Germans they were restored some nights later 6 . Death of a young Dutchman who refused to betray his comrades of the Resistance p.6 . A Dutchman said to help Jews to get abroad proved to be an agent of the Gestapo later he was sentenced for life p.6 . Escape in summer 1944 p.9 . 9 . References Mass suicide p.1 . The/GPE Hague/GPE p.4 . Protestants p.4 . Catholics p.7 . Illegal Life in Holland/GPE I moved to Holland/GPE back in 1928 having applied for a job p.5 there and been given the position . I only witnessed the events leading up to the occupation of Holland/GPE in 1940 from the outside . My mother and stepfather were living in Germany/GPE and I went to visit them often . However I had any first hand experience of National Socialism before 1940 . I lived in  Amsterdam/GPE and worked as a grain merchant having completed a business apprenticeship before moving to Holland/GPE . I then got some practical experience at a grain mill at the port in Rotterdam/LOC where I came into contact with common working class folk . This was how I learnt Dutch and I picked up how to speak the language as the locals did . This was very important later on in terms of disguising myself to fit in . Later I went on to work at the company headquarters . When the Germans invaded Holland/GPE on 11 May 1940 I knew exactly what this would mean for me as a Jew . To start with I carried on with my employment as a mid level employee at a large trading company . I did not have Dutch citizenship . The Nazi first approach was to force the Jews to deliver radios and bicycles but I affected by this in the beginning . After the Germans marched into  Amsterdam/GPE a suicide epidemic erupted . Two of my friends were among those involved in this but one was stopped before it was too late . Others tried to flee illegally . Basically us Jews were under no illusions about the fate that awaited us . At this time I was a member of the KP Neederlande . It was extremely difficult when in February 1941 the so called Dutch National Socialist Movement – presumably on the Germans orders – started a small scale pogrom in  Amsterdam/GPE abusing older people and the like . Us Jews in  Amsterdam/GPE had our own structure that reflected that in place amongst the population at large . So we had Jewish police officers Jewish craftsmen Jewish scientists and Jewish bank directors . The psychological effects of this were as follows When the Nazis smashed up Bank Director Cohn china in Frankfurt/GPE his response may well have been Oh well as long as that all that happens . But Postman Cohn or Unemployed Cohn in  Amsterdam/GPE was not quite so calm following the destruction of his bed given that items had been taken away from him that were essential to his life . The outward difference here was that the neighbour of Mr Bank Director Cohn in Frankfurt/GPE would either have been a man in a similar position to our Mr Cohn with a similar way of thinking or perhaps it would have been Postman Müller who would have told himself that Mr Bank Director got what he deserved . The neighbour of Postman Cohn in  Amsterdam/GPE on the other hand would have been Locksmith Jansen and he would have known only too well what it meant 2 to be robbed of things vital to you . His reaction would therefore have been to show solidarity . The result of all this was that a large number of Jewish craftsmen and workers stayed with their families in the days that followed the pogrom and defended their property when there was a second attempt at a riot of this kind . They fought back against the members of the Dutch National Socialist Movement beating them out of the Jewish quarter which had existed since the Middle Ages and where of the working class Jewish population had continued to live . As they retreated the Dutch Nazis were then attacked and beaten by non Jewish workers . The German occupying forces who were yet to make an appearance in this particular situation responded by detaining and deporting Jews predominantly young men to Mauthausen/CAMP concentration camp . Just a few short days after these young people were taken away their families received the news that they had all died from heart problems . Only one of them who had escaped in transit and returned to  Amsterdam/GPE was reported to have been shot while trying to escape . The population of  Amsterdam/GPE was severely emotionally affected and responded with anger . A general strike was declared and the KP Neederlande thought to have instigated it . All business in  Amsterdam/GPE was brought to a complete halt for around 24 hours . No trams or other public transport was running and workers walked out of their factories salespeople left their stores and office workers abandoned their offices . I personally been told about the planned strike beforehand but I joined in as soon as I heard about it by leaving work in such a way that made the others follow me . If you ask me there were a lot of victims from this one day strike since the Nazis just sit back and accept it . In fact taking this stand was a really important move as far as the resistance against the Germans was concerned because it showed the Dutch population that resistance was a viable option . Plus the fact that people have to be affiliated to a particular political party in order to join in with the strike meant that even people based outside of  Amsterdam/GPE who even actively involved in it then felt morally obliged to take part in some form of resistance against the German occupying forces . The repressive measures now being enforced by the Germans only encouraged this reaction . They were initially only aimed at the Jews who were oppressed further shortly after this time . As business had come to a complete standstill particularly within my line of work I took a course on autogenous welding and also went to a specialist school for metal workers . This gave me a way to get closer to the working population of the city . Although I had absolutely no clue about the ins and outs I was gradually becoming convinced that all of us Jews were going to either be murdered or end up dying in a concentration camp somewhere anyway if the war 3 end with the Germans being defeated soon . As the developments at the front made it look unlikely that the war would be coming to an end in the foreseeable future I made the decision to die standing . I had joined the KP Neederlande just after the Nazis came to power in Germany/GPE . Up to this point my involvement in the party extended beyond taking part in Marxist training courses and getting involved in providing aid to Jewish and non Jewish emigrants . It was showing anti Fascist solidarity without a party specific . One evening we were in a class being taught about the Communist manifesto by a German Communist when there was a knock at the door . One of our comrades came in and took the course instructor out of the room . The latter came back in shortly and announced going to Spain/GPE . He turned to me and said You can take over with the rest of the teaching . My immediate response was that I had enough training myself . He replied If I can decide to go to Spain/GPE in less than 10 minutes you can prepare yourself to teach the rest of the course in that time too . Of course that was long before the Second World War broke out . Shortly after the strike I mentioned before one KP member came to me to ask if I would be willing to join in with the illegal fight against the Nazis . I agreed to be part of the fight and was tasked with putting together a group that I would first have to teach about the views on the need for a resistance movement and what form this should take . However I was only given very little in the way of instructions from the top so that I would be able to stick to my task of bringing people up to speed on the ideology . I have to say that this bringing people up to speed was definitely influenced significantly by my own Marxist beliefs which did not necessarily strictly follow the teachings of the party . I was very much of the belief that anything that would strengthen the resistance was good and anyone willing to respond to the call to arms was welcome regardless of their motivation . And it was by following these principles that I succeeded . I was then entrusted with designing and printing flyers . In the meantime the situation had progressed to the point that it was suggested that the Jewish employees at my company around 12 to 15 people should leave I was actually only still part of the company nominally as there was still the option of a settlement being paid out at this stage but there was some speculation about them maybe having to let us go in a few weeks without this payment . At this point unemployed people in Holland/GPE were forced to go to Germany/GPE as foreign labourers so the majority of Dutch companies held on to their staff even when there enough work for them . This was the case at the company I worked for . We the Jewish contingent at work decided to accept the management offer 4 to take six months pay but leave immediately . And I want to add at this point that I and others received financial support from the Directors later down the line . It was around this time that the Jewish star badges were introduced in Holland/GPE and I wore one myself for a few weeks . After being mobbed and threatened by German soldiers and officers though I decided to resolve this issue by no longer wearing the Jewish star . 1941 was drawing to a close when I heard that the Gestapo and Green Police were starting to arrest Jews with German citizenship . A concentration camp had already been set up for these Jews in Westerbork/CAMP . According to my reliable sources there actually any particular atrocities to report of there – at least back then – because everyone was sent on elsewhere from there . I decided that I needed to disappear and from that moment on I was living illegally . This marked the start of a new phase in my life . At the time I knew an old woman – she was a non Jewish German – who was doing very badly indeed . I had been paying the rent on her small apartment for a long time having been prompted to help out by some Dutch friends . I offered to kit this woman home out with my furniture and she accepted . Then when they started to search Jews homes and make arrests there I made my way to her place to hide out . Just a few days later the German police did actually show up at my cleared out apartment . Obviously when I started out in my new illegal life I lost the option of collecting ration cards in the usual way . To start off with I turned to the owner of a small grocery store who I knew was a devout Protestant . Once we had pushed past some conflicting morals he agreed to feed me from his stocks . He continued to do this for some time . I was living in a working class district along with a Jewish minority . Young Jews in particular were arrested there at every opportunity and my landlady started to get nervous . I was worried that she might be so scared that she would betray me so I moved to The/GPE Hague/GPE . I had some friends a Protestant man and Jewish woman there who offered me a place to hide . I know my way around the city at all and one day I ended up right in the middle of a Jewish raid . Back in  Amsterdam/GPE I had managed to get hold of forged ID papers . The forgery exactly the most sophisticated and I was terrified that there was no way that the Dutch police officer who had caught me notice . I decided to take a risk and rudely told him that I would have to lodge a complaint if he let me go on my way immediately . I explained that I was in The/GPE Hague/GPE on official business for the Ministry of Food . I went on to say that I had absolutely no idea what he wanted with me and that they had detained me for several hours in  Amsterdam/GPE too without any legitimate reason . The police officer started to bluff and apologised explaining that I looked a bit Jewish and that the stamp on my ID papers had made him suspicious note that this was the only genuine thing on the documentation . Then he let me go . I asked my friend in The/GPE Hague/GPE to travel to  Amsterdam/GPE for me to find out how my 5 female Jewish was doing . He came back with the news that she and her brother had been summoned to work in Poland/GPE and that they would be leaving the next morning . I made my way to  Amsterdam/GPE without delay and went to the apartment that my friend whose father did some minor tailoring work lived in . When I entered the apartment my friend was sitting at the table with her mother and two strange men . My friend jumped up and politely asked me as though I were a stranger What do you want ? I understood what she was doing and answered Your father has had one of my suits for six weeks now . I want it back as I need to wear it . I will come back at 7 this evening and I will be taking it away with me . I care whether it is repaired or not . And I stormed out of the apartment swearing under my breath . I waited over the road – in the shop of the greengrocer I mentioned earlier – until the two officials had left . I then went back into the apartment took my friend hand in mine and together we left the apartment in which her parents and brothers lived . She never saw them again . Her younger brother was deported the very next day and her parents were too a few weeks later . We stayed in The/GPE Hague/GPE with the same friends as before for a while . It long before the KP sourced us some ration cards . These cards had been stolen from rural offices by action groups which were not linked to any particular political party and also included a lot of students . One student group managed to get hold of better ID papers for me and my female friend . I also asked students to get similar papers for other Jews in hiding . We had to pay a price for these papers . One of the Directors at the company I used to work at gave me the money we needed without making me tell him what I was going to use it for . In Holland/GPE this was a matter of pride and honour . A national front had been created – an individual political leanings matter anymore . It was all about doing whatever it took to save people lives . After a few weeks I thought it was advisable that my female friend and I moved in with some acquaintances of my male friend . I then left her there alone and returned to  Amsterdam/GPE where I stayed with someone I used to work with who was now working as a minor official at a government office . He stole some sheets of paper with an official letterhead and a genuine government stamp for me . I used them to create official assignments that I could use for identification purposes . For example I used the following kind of text addressed to myself Upon your visit to company X or Y it is essential that you check they are using this or that type of flour . I was careful to never use any names in these letters . Now that I was back in  Amsterdam/GPE I took charge of my old group again and we started to copy and disseminate anti Nazi propaganda materials like before . For instance we equipped the basement of one house with typewriters and 6 copiers . When we arrived to start work one morning we noticed there had been a break in and the typewriters had been stolen . We moved our base to another location right away . However the KP informed reliable people in the surrounding area that the machines that had been stolen were being used as a weapon against the Germans . A few nights later they had been returned to us . I carried on with this work with the group for months and months until a few days before the Easter of 1943 when we found out that a man had been arrested with one of our flyers on him . He had been given the flyer directly by one of my workers who was a 22 year old newlywed Dutchman . I broke the group up immediately and told the Dutchman to go into hiding right away . Unfortunately he want to leave his young wife on her own and a few days later he was arrested . About a week after that his wife received the news that he had died from a heart condition . Given that no searches were performed at my home or at the home of any of the other members of our group around this time we can assume that this young Dutch man unbreakable silence was the cause of his death . To be on the safe side I moved several times outside of  Amsterdam/GPE . Upon my return to the city I found that my friends were ready to continue with our work without any exceptions . I got a gun at this point and once again resolved to never be taken in by the Germans alive . The situation continued to get more and more critical . It goes without saying that the Germans were not unaware of the fact that many Jews were in hiding in Holland/GPE . They ramped up the raids . One of my Jewish friends was found in his hideout . He tried to resist and was killed there and then . It was also around this time that the friends I had stayed within The/GPE Hague/GPE were arrested . My friend Jewish wife had taken her mother and brother in . These two were detained and sent to Poland/GPE whilst the wife herself was taken to a camp before being exonerated there and deported . Her husband also ended up in a concentration camp . He actually survived and the child is still alive now too . I then found out that there was a Dutch man living in who had a way of smuggling Jews out of the country . I believed him to be an informant and tried to ascertain whether or not my suspicions were justified by visiting him at his home . The man was very taken aback by my visit but said he would be willing to get me to Switzerland/GPE . When I asked him for details about the transport and preparations it became clear that he was in fact a Gestapo agent . I regret not shooting him there and then . He was later sentenced to life in prison . At least I was then able to warn my friends against him . As time went by I had to keep moving but the groups actions continued . These actions could be divided into two categories 1 . Those that had a direct benefit i.e. using force 7 to source food for the huge number of people living illegally Jews people being persecuted for their political views and people who had gone into hiding so they sent abroad as foreign labourers . 2 . At a later stage acts of sabotage that were aimed at disrupting the tools and equipment of the German armed forces mainly transport and communication links . Alongside these activities we also pursued our propaganda based work throughout the entire occupation . The aim of this was to keep the spirit of resistance alive among the people . Some of the things we did were objectively unproductive but they were still a statement of that desire to resist . Examples included an arson attack on a German cinema and robbing a Dutch office when ration cards were being given out . When I was living illegally I bumped into a former colleague who was an Oberleutnant Fist Lieutenant in the Dutch Army . He waste any time before asking me Are you living illegally ? When I answered yes he asked where I would be eating that evening . Realising that my food situation all that great he said coming for dinner at mine . I had mixed feelings about going but I was very well fed . During that evening the officer said to me I know any Jews and I want to because I like them . But I get involved with that Nazi scum because of it . This man was an antisemite in every sense of the word . But he had invited me over at a critical time to prove to himself that his hate of the Jews had nothing whatsoever to do with the antisemitism of the Nazis . One day the Germans searched systematically for Jews throughout the southern district of  Amsterdam/GPE . By chance I managed to avoid this raid despite living in the area . At the time I was in contact with a German woman who worked in the SD Security Service kitchen and invited me along so I could eat . The SD aware that this woman fiancé had been killed by the SA Assault Division several years previously for political reasons . When I went to see her one Saturday lunchtime to get something to eat she told me that I needed to leave the city right away as a squad of thousands of police officers was expected to arrive later that day . I ran out of the house grabbing a fishing rod that was standing in the hallway and retreated to the countryside . I returned to  Amsterdam/GPE around two days later and although I been caught several hundred Jews had been arrested . What I can say is that there were two groups of trustworthy helpers standing by at all times political and religious fanatics . As I avoided people that I knew to be Communists to protect my safety I often had to turn to devout Christians when it came to finding somewhere to stay . A former colleague from the company I worked at before – a dedicated Catholic and father to seven children 8 living in a cramped apartment – said he would be willing to take me in any time . He also shared the little food he and his kids had with me on several occasions . I was really touched when once as we were saying goodnight the youngest in the family who was only about four years old promised me that he and his siblings prayed for me every night . I still had to move on a regular basis especially once I discovered after a while that the SD were interested in finding out where I was staying and that they even knew a few of my cover names . I never did find out where they got that information from . Eventually I ended up back in The/GPE Hague/GPE . This was around the time the Battle of Arnheim broke out in 1944 . After my female friend had been working as a maid in a residential suburb just outside of The/GPE Hague/GPE for a while I had let her leave for Arnheim/GPE where she had been promised somewhere safe to stay . But now I considered her life to be in danger there so I sourced a Red Cross vehicle with two uniformed drivers . These drivers would however require a command to travel and the only way to get one of those was with a genuine medical certificate . I went to a random doctor and asked for one of these certificates for my female friend so I could go and get her . I failed to mention anything about the nature of her illness to him though . When the nonplussed doctor asked to see some form of identification I simply showed him my gun . That seemed to do the trick . I sent one of the drivers off with the medical certificate to the office that needed to issue the travel command . I decided to stay with the doctor whilst the driver did this as I risk the terrified man being so scared that he felt the need to call this office to declare the certificate invalid . Luckily everything worked out well and we drove straight from the doctor house to Arnheim/GPE . On the way there we come across a single vehicle but the roads were littered with burnt out cars . German and English artillery shots were fired above us throughout our entire journey . We saw German troops lying in the ditches to the sides of the roads but we managed to make it to Arnheim/GPE without any trouble at all . The house that my female friend had been living in had been abandoned . The house next door was completely destroyed . After wandering around for a while we eventually found who we were looking for and we were able to set off together on our journey back to The/GPE Hague/GPE . On the way this time an SS staff messenger stopped us and got into our car . Despite our protests and attempts to quote the Geneva Convention he go away . However in the end having him with us may have provided us with some protection against any further checks . Shortly after this I was stopped in the street in  Amsterdam/GPE by an SS officer during one operation . He pulled me into the hallway of a house and started to question me there . I was frightened to death because I had illegal materials with me in my briefcase although they were well hidden away in amongst dirty laundry . The man exactly the sharpest tool in the box luckily . 9 I was able to deceive him by pretending to be really stupid . I started off being very friendly and giving him information about myself and my situation but when he asked me any further questions I just played dumb and acted ignorant . After a lot of going back and forth he eventually let me go . Some of the stories might sound like they are so simple now but everything we did was accompanied by an overwhelming sense of fear . In the summer of 1944 I heard that the Gestapo had searched several of my former homes and were also trying to find out information about me . At this time the worsening food shortage also meant that all of the people that had helped me by giving me a roof over my head started to lose their nerve and I once again found myself struggling to find accommodation even for one night at a time . Based on all of these factors I decided to make the leap over to the allied armies . The Dutch brother of my landlady at the time was afraid of being taken in as a foreign labourer and so he decided to join me in my plan to head to the south of the country or to Belgium/GPE until we found allied troops . I found a ladies bike without any tyres and took it with me on my journey . The hardest part was having to cross the three big branches of the Rhine with some of the crossings under heavy surveillance or completely destroyed . But we managed it and we arrived in Tilburg/LOC the city in which my companion childhood home was located sometime around 24 August 1944 . The English army occupied Tilburg/LOC just two or three days later and my time living illegally came to an end . I later heard that my final fixed abode had been searched and all of my housemates had been arrested . Luckily they had all survived . Signed Mr Joseph 1 The statistic of 80 has been understood to refer to the proportion of the working class Jewish population that lived in the Jewish quarter at this time . 2 Parteinote has been understood to mean the message or ideology of a particular political party . 3 The German word Freundin can mean both friend and girlfriend – throughout the translation it has been assumed that reference is being made to a female friend . 
setting fire to the synagogue and destroying Jewish property in Breslau/GPE the Gestapo rounded up the whole male Jewish population . Rosten was arrested on 11 November 1938 and sent to Buchenwald/CAMP . About people arrived there within two days . 5 storeys of shelves of bare wood served as sleeping accommodation . People were flogged at night in front of the huts and many perished . P. Rosten Experiences in Buchenwald/CAMP Concentration Camp In the following pages I shall describe in the whole only my personal experiences what I have seen with my eyes or have heard with my ears . Should I mention events I have been told by other people I would make it quite clear . In the night of November 9th to 10th 1938 the night following the mysterious death of one of the German Secretaries to the German Embassy in Paris/GPE shot at by a young Jew at Breslau/GPE the town where I lived like in all the other towns in the whole of Germany/GPE the biggest Jewish Synagogue a large building in the middle of the town was set on fire by the SS and all Jewish shops were destroyed . In the morning I got the news by phone from my sister and went to see with my own eyes what I could believe . It was really TRUE the large building situated next to the Police H.Q. was ablaze and walking home I saw the shattered windos in Jewish shops . I met many of the Gestapo lorries giving the special hooting signal of the Gestapo loaded with Jews who were brought to the Police H.Q. I went home to carry on with my practice . Very soon friends of ours whose husbands had been arrested by the SS called on us telling how it happened and asking advice . The whole day long I got news that acquaintances of ours had been taken to the Police even a boy of 16 . Jews walking in the streets were arrested it was clear that the Gestapo was rounding up the whole male Jewish population it was a real pogrom . From 11 in the morning my phone did not work and I was awaiting the SS during the whole day . But not before 6 next morning 3 SS men came to fetch me and to bring me to the next Police Station . I was the first man arrested in our district on this day November 11th . About 6 men in plain clothes were sitting in one room there with long lists apparently checking the list of the Jews in that district who had to be arrested . Every few minutes one or more newcomers arrived all Jews or of Jewish origin very many of them of course acquaintances of mine . None of us knew what happened to the men arrested the day before . I was rather sure that they were kept still at Police H.Q. In the middle of the morning we were brought by a lorry there where we had to remain the whole day in a courtyard standing without any possibility of sitting down . Till the late afternoon more Jews arrived . From time to time we 2 had to move round in the rather small courtyard to keep warm as it was rather cold . Between 4 and 5 we got a rather thin rice soup Please note this time ! . In the evening we were moved into a larger courtyard and from there guarded by SS men and mounted police to a Railway Station where a special train was waiting for us . The compartments were not crowded . In every compartment were posted a Police Officer fully armed with pistol and rifle and an armed SS man . Besides a kick with the butt end of a rifle if somebody was not quick enough in boarding the train nothing happened . I reckon that we were about 1000 to 1500 arrested people . The train left Breslau/GPE at about 10 in the night and arrived at Weimar/LOC next morning at about 8 . Long before watching the stations where thr train stopped we had no doubt about our journay destination After the train had stopped in Weimar Station Police Officers with loaded rifles were placed at both sides of the train filled with unarmed Jews their rifles directed against the windows of the train . During the time we had to wait for the order to leave the train we had ample opportunity to get to know the mentatlity of our future guards . A youngster belonging to the SS Death Head Formation came into our compartment telling that he lived formerly at Breslau/GPE too and asking for some Jewish people he would have liked to meet in the C.C. He was not more than 20 . The whole lot guarding the Camp were about 20 or in the early 20ties but the Commander . He told the other SS man very proudly how he enjoyed the day before beating and flogging the newcomers . He spoiled his gloves which were torn and bloodstained so he had to get new ones ! He told laughing what great fun it was when the other night SS men took out Jews from sleeping cars and brought them in pyjamas into the Camp . Actually I have not seen any man in the Camp in pyjamas . Maybe they got prisoner wear before I arrived . But a man from Breslau/GPE Mr. T. had to go round for the whole time in slippers as the SS men who arrested him did not give him time to put on his shoes . One hour passed . Then we were ordered to alight and to take off our hats and glasses . In order to make you understand what happened now I have to tell you that in German railway stations the travellers going from one platform to the other or leaving the station have to walk through subways below the rails . We were ordered to hurry into such a tunnel and had to run along a row of SS men kicking and beating with the but ends people who in their opinion did not walk quick enough . I remember how they threw away the stick of an man who for some years after a serious illness had to use a walking stick . There were of course men who could not 3 walk quickly men near the 70 sick people and they experienced for the first time the brutality of our guards . Many men tumbled down the steps leading to the subway one pushing the other in order to avoid kicking and whipping by the SS . They used long whips with a small ball made of lead on the end . I was lucky enough to eschew any whipping . Other people told me that though the wounds were bleeding they were not very painful . When we came into the subway the exit was closed by a cordon of guards and we were penned and pressed against the walls of the tunnel by the SS men coming into the subway behind our backs . The guards whipped us and poured cold water into the crowd and threatened us with their guns shouting and ordering us to get closer together though we were pressed to the walls like sardines in a tin . In fear of death many men cried and moaned everybody tried without any consideration what happened to the other people to escape the whipping and the rough treatment . I was sure that we would not leave this subway alive . Old men got breathless some were trampled down . Never in my whole life and I was in the 1st war for nearly 4½ years 2½ years in the frontline with an Infantry Regiment I have seen such a terrible scene . Suddenly we got the order to leave the subway of course again in a hurry and the cordon clowing up the tunnel gave way . I saw one man lying on the pavement trampled down unable to get up or to move himself and he was carried away by 4 other men . I am sure he was dead or dying the first of the many victims of the ‘ action that was the official term used in the Camp . Later on we were told that the very first victim was a man who committed suicide the night before in the train . Not the only one who did it . A former Judge from Breslau/GPE committed suicide in the first night in the Camp with a pocket knife he had hidden from the Nazis . When we left the staion running we found many lorries outside waiting . We were helped into it with the heels or butt ends of the guardsmen . In the crowded lorry we had to sit our heads bent down . As soon as a man lifted his head up a little bit he got a whipping and whipping was the usual way of notice when the guard whished to talk with one of us . For instance he asked a man ‘ What is your profession ? Answer ‘ Formerly I was a banker . The SS man laughing ‘ What ? You are a rogue . Well what are you ? Answer ? of course regarding the whip ‘ A rogue ! After a ride of about half an hour we arrived in the notorious Camp of Buchenwald/CAMP a name of horror for every Jew and all decent people in Germany/GPE . Some short general remarks Buchenwald/CAMP is situated in the middle of Thuringia/GPE on top of a hill surrounded by lovely forest covered small mountains . It is really blasphemy if 4 you remember that Goethe recovered rather often near this place from his duties and found fresh inspirations in this beautiful landscape . The place is hort of water due to the structure of the soil . The whole large compound is urrounded by electrified barbed wire . The main entrace is towered by a big platform from where the whole compound can be overlooked . There always two guardsmen are standing with machine guns ready for action . Round the whole Camp small watch turrets are built so near each to the next that the sentries are able to cover the distance between them by rifle shots . They are armed with one machine gun each besides the gun every guardsman is carrying . When our lorries had passed the main gate they stopped on a large parade ground and we had to leave the lorries in the usual hurry and with the usual help . It was about 10 a.m. and during the whole day we were moved on the parade ground . For the whole time Jews from all parts of Germany/GPE arrived . The Hews from Berlin/GPE were brought to the C.C. at Sachsenhausen/CAMP near Berlin/GPE the Jews from South Germany/GPE to Dachau/CAMP near Munich/GPE . At Buchenwald/CAMP during these 2 days about 10 people arrived about 3 between them from Breslau/GPE and about the same number from Frankfurt/GPE on Main . It was a dark night when at midnight we physically and mentally exhausted not to say broken were allowed to enter a large hut . We had not got any food nor drink since the afternoon the day before . We passed the rest of the night in the not yet finished hut sitting on large logs and boards leaning one to the other . Early next morning we had to leave the hut . We were allowed to loiter for a short time in front of the hut before we were ordered again to the parade ground . But not before 11 we got some so called coffee we were standing in rank and file and one small bowl had to do for 10 people . The last man of course could be happy if he got more than a few drops ! Never in my life any coffee tasted so nicely to me though it was no real coffee ! One experience we had this morning a man broke down on the parade ground and was laid down under a tree . He was moaning and apparently suffering very much . Nobody was allowed to talk to him nor to give him any help not even a drop of water . He was lying there till he was dead . Now I shall have to explain to you the arrangements in the huts our accomodation for the next weeks . The prisoners who had to live for a longer time some for many years in the C.C. were accomodated in small huts got prisoner wear had to work hard they could wash every second day . We 10 taken into the C.C. during this ‘ November action were accomodated into 5 large wooden sheds quickly and roughly built . The arrangements in these 5 huts I can not compare but with the bookshelves in a library . On the walls and between there were erected large wooden frames with 5 storeys of shelves . On these bare boards we had to lie and to try to sleep . But books stand in the shelves of a library here nobody but the men on the top of the storeys could really sit down as the other ‘ frames were not high enough . The men sleeping in the upper storeys had to climb up like monkeys . I used to take off my jacket and used it as a pillow wrapping myself in my overcoat . I could not take off my shoes for the night as one of my laces was torn and I had to knot it . The nights were terrible . I slept mostly for about 2 hours . Most people had caught a cold so they were coughing and sneezing the whole night . Many had to get up in the night . It was almost impossible to sleep . In the first nights which I shall describe later many men started crying driven nearly or really mad . There were some men about 70 on the other hand boys under 18 crippled men sick men the worst very likely a barrister from Hannover/GPE wounded in the last war with many scars in his face one eye lost incapable to walk without other people help . One of the worst features was the thirst . We had no possibility to get water . Later on we could buy sometimes mineral water though rather expensive . When we got this water for the first time nearly fighting was going on because many men were afraid they would not get a bottle . One rainy day we were standing under the caves with mugs to collect some rainwater for a drink . I had caught a very bad cold in consequence of which I was nearly deaf on one ear for about 2 months . I went to the doctor to get a tabloid but it was more important to get the few drops of water he could give with the tabloid . Some doctors between us had started a volontary medical service in the huts an emergency service only of course . Who fell seriously ill was mostly lost . The sick people were brought into a special room and some serious cases into the Camp Hospital . Day after day many of the prisoners died . They were cremated and not before some weeks later the relatives got the ashes . Never before in my life I have seen the connection between body and sould as clearly as there a man got a nervous breakdown and collapsed afterwards and many of them could not recover . It have no estimate about the death rate but I was told by an older prisoner that on a single day up to 30 men died . The sanitary conveniences were much worse than I have ever seen in the last war . It was really a miracle that no epidemic disease broke out . I can not give a description but I have to mention that the whole plant consisted from pits and long poles in the open air and that there was room for about 75 at a time and we were 10 . 6 As indigestion was a common feature the men were queuing the whole dau for the use of this convenience . During the night we were not allowed to got there but in groups of 10 men and one of them had to ask leave of one of the guards standing on the nearest turret . For fun they made conditions for instance they ordered the men to lie down at first in a rainy night of course in another night a man had to sing a song before getting the permission . When a man left the hut alone not aware that he had to wait for the others the sentry shot . Washing accomodation did not exist . I could not wash even my hands or rinse my mouth for the whole 3 weeks . Food was not bad but on Sundays we did not get a midday meal . For supper we got bread rather plentiful . But we had no opportunity to keep our supplies in a proper way . We had to kepp it in our shelves where we slept or in the pockets of our coats . For supper we got sometimes sausage or smoked herring or meat jelly but we had to eat it with the fingers as we got in the first week neither plates nor cutlery . And we knew that our comrades who distributed the food hat not washed their hands as long as we . For the midday meal a hot dish about 200 plates or bowls and sppons were available for 2000 men in one hut . Therefore everybody who was not so fortunate to be between the first 200 had to use a dirty plate and spoon as there was no earthly chance to clean it . Later on we could buy of course very expensive plates and sppons and mugs for our own . But there was still no chance for cleaning your things . I used to try to clean my plate with the paper sheets from a copy book I could get . During our meals we had no opportunity to sit down . We had to stand in fron of the hut or to eat walking to and fro outdoors or in the evening lying on the shelves . Before we were released we had to leave our bought plates etc . and to pay each for using the Government property ! In the huts and outside the huts big loudspeakers were installed and all order were given from H.Q. by loudspeaker . When we were addressed the usual language was Jewish swines listen or Jewish gang for release or for other reasons they said always The Jew X. Anything was done to strain on our nerves and to produce a nervous breakdown . And now I shall have to try to describe to you the terrible horroe happening during the first 4 or 5 nights . Between our huts our 5 huts were rather small passages . In the middle of the night a detachment of the guardsmen brought a sort of frame which I have seen in daylight on the second day to lay down men for flogging and then they flogged and whipped 7 several men with 25 strokes of a whip or ‘ Cat I do know why they tortured these men maybe they had committed some ‘ crime perhaps given an answer not having been asked for . But i know that they took indiscreminately especially young men from the huts and especially those who started crying . How many were killed in these nights I can not tell . We were not allowed to leave our shelves . But I heard more than once the order ‘ Take away the corpse and one morning I saw a man dead in front of our hut . To describe what was going on inside the hut during th such a night is impossible . Old and young men in fear of getting flogged cried and moaned some were praying many soiled themselves as they were not allowed to leave the hut . Small wonder that some perhaps driven mad or in a vain attempt to escape ran against the electrified barbed wire and died at once . I have to mention that the older prisoners who had to assist our guards some old Communists who had been for 5 years and longer in the CC tried their best to help us especially during these terrible scenes . They smacked us every now and then but only when one of the supervisors was present . It was not wise to stand in the first or last file as the SS men liked to kick and smack us as often as possible . Flogging I have seen in daytime too one man got 25 strokes because he was walking by mistake round instead of sitting in rank and file on the parade ground . It was obvious that the flogging was great fun for the men doing this job a special commando . After the first 5 days were gone the SS men left us in the whole to ourselves and we were guarded by older prisoners some well educated by the SS men . Other tortures I have not seen with my own eyes . But next to the entrance gate we heard often moaning and crying and we were told by the older prisoners that the moaning men were hanged up with their arms on the ceiling for 24 hours . I was asked often how did you get out ? About one week after our imprisonment the first men were released all men who could prove that the had an opportunity for emigration in the very near future . After a fortnight all men over 60 were released an by the end of the 3rd week all those who could produce the certificate that they were in the possession of the Remembrance Medal for combattants in the last war . Only who had by pure chance this certificate in his pocket ! Other papers who proved that they were combatants of the last war were not accepted . I was lucky enough to have this certificate with me . And now to end my story some items from our release with a somewhat comical tinge . Before our release we got a shave and had of course to pay for it . We were warned by more experienced people to hide some of our money and 8 so I kept in my hand ½ Mk about lod to pay for it but the SS man serving as cashier took out of my pocket 5 Mk about 8/ that was the most expensive shave I ever got . Before we left the Camp the had the impudence to collect money from us for the ‘ Winterhilfswerk des Deutschen Volkes Winter Relief Funds for the German People and I am still glad that I managed to give not more than 10 Pf . 2d to these brutes . I am sure that they kept the money for themselves . Guards brought us to the main road leading to Weimar/LOC leading us through shrubs on a small slippery pathway through the forest in a hurry of course . From Weimar/LOC we were not allowed to travel by fast train . Next morning I arrived at home but I had to report at once to the Gestapo H.Q. and to sign a form that I acknowledged to have been released from the C.C. only to be able to speedy up my and my family emigration . But it lasted 8 long and dreadful months before we reached this helpful country and could spleep for the first time without fear to experience once more a German/CAMP concentration camp . That is the story I have to tell you . We are in the middle of the fight against these dark and evil powers or perhaps starting the last chapter . We are told and we read so often that after this war is over anything will be better than it was before . So the story might be TRUE that one soldier told his pal Well if the world will be such a lovely place after the war why did we start this war earlier ? It is up to the younger generation to build up a better world from the shambles our generation left them . And when one day the last Nazi died in a C.C. there should be no room for Concentration Camps any more in a world free from fear . 
Levy reports on his father experiences from 1933 when he lost his job with the town council of Berlin/GPE . Thanks to his mixed marriage he did not get into trouble until he was suddenly arrested and sent to Buchenwald/CAMP in 1938 . His son tells about the ill treatment there the filth sadistic atrocities mostly due to the young camp leader Jonny and his SS helpers . Preferably high officials of the former regime were ordered to clean the latrines it even happened that people were drowned there . His father was released when his family got a ticket for him to Shanghai/GPE in February 1939 where he later died . 9 . References Punishments . Suicides . Bibelfeorscher . Communists . Social democrats . Atrocities . Ill treatment at Buchenwald/CAMP In 1933 at the start of the Nazi régime my father lost his job working for the Berlin/GPE city council . He was a qualified banker and was employed by the council in this capacity . Apart from the loss of his post my father encountered relatively few problems right up until 1938 . This was mainly because he was married to an Aryan and the children from this marriage had been baptised and brought up in the Christian faith . But in 1938 he was suddenly arrested despite not having committed any criminal offence . Ten days later we learned that he had been imprisoned in Buchenwald/CAMP . I have no cause to doubt my father testimony which he revealed to us under pledge of secrecy . In Buchenwald/CAMP he had to sign a declaration stating that he would tell nobody of his experiences not even his closest family members . On arrival his head was shaved . Then he was made to hand over his personal effects . These were stuffed into a sack and 2 drenched in a chemical fluid which meant the resulting creases could never be removed . My father was given the hardest labour in the camp . He was assigned to work in the quarry . Shifts of 10 12 hours were not uncommon . The vast rocks had to be moved at a running pace . Any prisoner caught slacking because he was simply too exhausted was reported . This almost certainly led to him being put over the block . These punishments were inflicted by a young SS man known as Jonny . His brutality was feared throughout the camp . The punishments were inflicted as follows when the prisoners returned to the block after work tired and near to collapse a roll call would suddenly be announced . What scant food the men were given had to be left behind as they scrambled to get to the parade ground as quickly as they could . Once there they were made to stand to attention for up to 18 hours until the camp leader Jonny appeared . The prisoner who was to be punished had to step forward as his name was called and go and fetch the whipping block on which he was about to be beaten . Three burly SS men would then strap the victim to the block . Jonny never let anyone get away with fewer than 25 lashes . While two of the SS men beat the victim on the bare backside with sticks a third would keep count . It often happened that after 20 lashes this guy would suddenly announce I lost count ! and the whole procedure would have to be started again . By the time the prisoner was unstrapped from the block he was completely broken even unconscious . Very often the man kidneys had been struck so hard that the victim never ever recovered from the damage . This appalling roll call happened three times every week . The food in short supply and of very poor quality was dished out in the same bowls the prisoners washed in . Even those inmates with open tuberculosis were using the same bowls for eating and washing . Inside Buchenwald/CAMP camp was an area known as the death zone a 3 strip of land about 20 metres wide that ran all the way round the electrified perimeter fence . Any prisoner entering the death zone was shot dead either by one of the watch tower guards or an SS man who happened to be nearby – there was no warning . Stepping onto this strip of land was treated as an escape attempt . One of the guards on duty grabbed my father hat and tossed it into the death zone . If my father had gone after it he would have been immediately shot while trying to escape . Many desperate prisoners chose to commit suicide by running onto the high voltage fence . In the morning you could see their charred corpses hanging from the wire . One of the most repulsive and degrading jobs was that undertaken by the 4711 column . The people chosen for this work were mainly those who had held high office or been important figures in the political and cultural life of the Weimar Republic . It was the job of this column to clean the latrines . Without any equipment . Anyone caught being physically sick would be thrown into the latrine by the SS guard on duty . Many drowned in the excrement . One of the blocks housed Jehovah Witnesses and prominent Communists and Social Democrats . Unfortunately my father did not know any of their names . For a joke the SS used to put these people on a chain and make them bark like dogs . One of the cruellest punishments was what was known as the iron maiden a torture implement modelled on that used in the Middle Ages . It consisted of an iron cage lined with long sharp nails . Prisoners subjected to this punishment rarely survived the ordeal . We were only able to secure my father release because we his family managed to obtain a passage for him to Shanghai/GPE . He was therefore freed earlier than others but on the condition that he reported every day to his local police station . My father left Germany/GPE on 20 February 1939 . He died in Shanghai/GPE as a result of the ill treatment suffered while in prison . 
report of an interview . Together with the whole Jewish community of Stettin/GPE the Heymann family was deported under appalling conditions to Belsyce/GPE near Lublin/CAMP on 13 February 1940 . Half of the eight thousand inhabitants were Jews the Poles including the Polish partisans betrayed the Jews for a reward from the Germans p. 1 3 . Two men escaped from an extermination camp and told about the ‘ shower baths and that nobody left these camps alive also that the SS were never granted leave p.4 . At Belsyce/GPE a great many Jews lived in hiding . Selections . In spring 1942 all patients in the hospital were killed . In summer all children and old people were shot . In spring 1943 300 men and 100 women were taken to Budzin/CAMP the rest were shot most of them by the camp leader SS Oberscharführer Veiks a sadist who enjoyed killing p.4 5 . Horrible conditions in the camp . Kind commander Stockmann a Jew . Forced labour at Heinkel Werke . Obersturmführer Tauscher replacing Veiks was more lenient had only two men shot when a prisoner escaped instead of ten etc . Conditions improved much when at the end of the year 1943 the camp changed from a Judenlager to a K.Z. p.3 . Transfer to Mielec/CAMP twelve hours daily work in a factory nearly no food filth and vermin unbearable . With other prisoners the author was working in an aircraft factory at Flossenburg/CAMP Bavaria/LOC p.6 . In 1944 many Hungarian Jews arrived . On a week march towards Dachau/CAMP the Jewish prisoners were machine gunned from the air most of the time many died from exhaustion and starvation . 8 . References From Stettin/GPE Dr. Flater Dombrower p.1 Bauchwitz see related reports P.III.h . Budszin No . 488 and P.III.h . No . 22 p.15 18 . Later hanged for telling in factory about conditions in camp p.1 2 5 . Prager from Krakow/GPE teacher p.2 . Judenrat p. 2 Goldstein Jewish traitor p.2 . Jewish police . Judenlager Poniatow p.2 3 . Majdanek/CAMP . Gestapo bribable as well as SS p.2 3 . Most horrible atrocities committed by Ukrainians p.3 4 . Jewish camp doctor Mosbach . Escapes p.3 5 . Werkschutz p.5 . Wieliczka/CAMP camp p.6 . Experiments in hospital p.6 . Report on the experiences in Poland/GPE of Manfred Heymann 1940 1945 In 1940 Manfred was 10 years of age . He lived with his parents and his sixteen year old brother Eugen in Stettin/GPE . On February 13 1940 the whole family including the 76 year old grandmother who was living with them was taken by the Gestapo to to Poland/GPE . They were allowed to take one suitcase each . On this transport all the Stettin/GPE Jews were taken only Mischlinge being left . The three to five thousand people were transported in trains fairly well treated and fed adequately on the journey . But as the carriages were unheated and it was a bitterly cold winter the older people especially suffered greatly . On arrival at Lublin/CAMP they were herded like cattle to the Lipowa P.O.W. Camp . Their luggage had been put in separate vans and none of it was ever returned to them . At this camp they remained for one day . Then the transport was divided into three sections . The first went to Piaski/GHETTO the second to Glusk/GHETTO and the third which included the Heymann family to Belsyce/GPE . The journey to Belsyce/GPE was made in sledges and Manfred remembers this as a nightmare . They took all day to cover the 24 km . in the bitter cold and snow . Many people including Manfred were frost bitten . A little girl on the same sledge as Manfred was so badly frost bitten that on arrival at Belsyce/GPE all her fingers and toes had to be amputated . Manfred grandmother suffered terribly and died soon after their arrival at Belsyce/GPE . The Polish Jews living in Belsyce/GPE had been told of the transport imminent arrival and were prepared to deal with the problem of a sudden increase in the population of the little town . Belsyce/GPE had between seven and eight thousand inhabitants of whom about 4000 were Jews . At this time the Germans did not interfere greatly with the Polish Jews lives . They still had their little shops round the market place and were able to carry on their trade undisturbed . However there was considerable anti Semitism among the non Jewish Poles sometimes Manfred feels with considerable justification for the Jews cheated their gentile neighbours right and left . The new inhabitants were billeted on families of Polish Jews who were most hospitable and helpful . The Heymann family stayed with a shoemaker Lipa Tepper who was very kind to them . The German Jews soon organised themselves . A committee was formed on which the leading members were Doctor Flater Herr Dombrower Herr Bauchwitz . A kitchen was set up with Mr Heymann in charge whilst Mrs Heymann cooked . Clothes supplied by the Polish Jews were distributed . The Heymann were also helped by parcels of food 2 and clothes sent to them by friends from Germany/GPE . A teacher Mr Prager of Cracow/GPE was engaged by Mr Heymann to teach Manfred and Doctor Flater sons . Up to the end of 1940 the Jews were allowed to work and conditions were not bad . Nо worse outrages occurred than a drunken SS man putting a Jew beard off . In the winter of 1940 all the Jews had to close their shops . All their goods were confiscated and they were not allowed in the Market/STREET Place/STREET which meant in fact that they could no longer carry on their trades . Now the Polish anti Semitism began to come out into the open . All the Jewish shops were immediately taken over by Poles . In 1941 a Judenrat was formed by the SS with Mr Bauchwitz in charge as he spoke German and could deal with the Germans . The SS also formed an Ordnungs Polizei a Jewish police whose main job was to keep Jews off the Market/STREET Place/STREET ./STREET Manfred brother Eugen joined this police . 8 pm curfew was instituted for the Jews . Heavy fines were imposed on any Jew infringing the curfew . Any Jew hiding goods from his former shop was liable to be shot . Kosher slaughter was forbidden on pain of death . There was one traitor among the Jews by name of Goldstein whom the SS put on the Judenrat as a reward for his betrayals . The first shooting probably due to information given to the Germans by Goldstein was when a Jew was caught at Kosher slaughter . Gradually the incidents increased . Drunken SS men would shoot or maltreat old Jews they found in the streets . But at this time the Gestapo was still bribable . A rich Jew who was arrested for some offence could still get off with a heavy bribe whilst the Gestapo Kommissar was friendly to the Judenrat and was bribed as a matter of course . In Autumn 1941 the SS selected the first Jews to be sent to the Judenlager Poniatow . The town was surrounded by SS . All the young men were driven into the Market place . Some were selected others released . Old Jews were shot out of hand . The second batch was selected in a similar way in Winter 1941 and sent to Judenlager Majdanek/CAMP . Now a Ghetto was established in Belsyce/GPE . Jews from all the surrounding villages had to come to Belsyce/GPE and live in certain streets . By the beginning of 1942 one third of the Jews had gone either on transports to other camps or killed . The Heymanns were fortunate in being protected by Eugen in the Ordnungs Dienst . In general this Jewish police was able to help their brethren by warning them before arrests and selections . But the Poles were prepared to betray the Jews at any time for a reward from the Germans . Fifty percent of the Jews in Belsyce/GPE lived in hiding . The most ingenious hideouts were invented especially by the Polish 3 Jews . Tunnels were dug under rooms cellars blocked in trap doors built in wardrobes . The German Jews not used to this kind of existence were unfortunately always the first to report when there were selections by the Germans . Meanwhile the Polish Jews had guards posted on the Lublin/CAMP road who would warn them of the approach of the Germans . By the time the SS arrived usually not a Polish Jew was to be found . At one of these selections Eugen was taken to Majdanek/CAMP but managed to escape and return to Belsyce/GPE . In Spring 1942 all the Belsyce/GPE Jews were taken to camps . The Heymanns again succeeded in staying behind by bribing SS . But Eugen was taken once more . Outside the town he jumped off the lorry with some other members of the Ordnungs Polizei who has also has been taken . The others were shot by the SS but Eugen got away . He was hidden that day by the regular German police stationed in that area fighting the resistance . Apart from the Heymann the only Jews left in Belsyce/GPE were those in hiding . Those the SS did not take to camps were shot . All those in the hospital were killed . After the SS had left the Jews remaining went round the town collecting their dead and burying them . The SS made them collect the Jews furniture and belongings and put them in the Jewish school and the Synagogue . Meanwhile the Poles joined in the plundering of former Jewish homes . Of the SS Manfred remembers that the worst sadists were among the Ukranian SS privates who raped women and committed the most horrible atrocities . In Summer 1942 the Germans decided to leave the remaining Belsyce Jews in a camp there . Orders were issued that any Jew found outside the camp after a certain date would be shot . A few Jews stayed in hiding with Polish friends a few joined the Partisans in the woods . But this was only possible with the Communist Partisans as the Polish Partisans gave any Jews they found up to the Germans . In Winter of the same year the SS announced that any Jews still in hiding could come into the camp . As it was impossible to live outside the camp all the remaining Jews came into the camp . Then came the next selection of 200 to go to Poniatow/LOC Judenlager/LOC . The whole camp had to march past the SS Commander and Manfred was lucky enough to get to the barracks without being picked out and thought he was safe . But the SS found that they had selected too few and the Commandant came into the barracks to find some more . Manfred was picked but a member of the Ordnungs Dienst told him to slip into a room off the main hall . This saved Manfred for later that day all the children and old people were shot in the cemetery outside Belsyce/CAMP . Only one little boy came back saved as if by a miracle with a bullet wound in his hand . 4 That same winter two men appeared in the camp who had escaped from an extermination саmp . This was the first the Belsyce Jews had heard of such camps . The two were Warsaw/GPE Jews . They had been taken by train to a camp in the East. The last stage of the journey was covered in a train consisting of cattle wagons with 80 to a wagon half of whom suffocated before they reached the camp . On the last part of the journey through a forest the SS took over from the train drivers . When they arrived a Jew came to meet them and told them that there was nothing to fear that they would just have a bath and would then be resettled elsewhere . The prisoners were unloaded and made to undress . Each received a ticket for his clothes and a piece of soap . They were then herded into shower baths . The doors were shut and the showers turned on but instead of water the showers produced gas . After a short time when the SS knew that all were dead the floor of the shower baths caved in and the bodies fell into trolleys which took them to the crematoria . No one ever left these camps alive . Even the SS were never granted leave . The day after the two men arrived they were caught and shot by the SS and left for the Jews to bury . But although both were shot in many places they were not dead . The camp Jewish doctor Mosbach patched them up and they survived . In Spring 1943 the greater part of the camp which now had 600 inmates was liquidated by SS Oberscharffuehrer Veiks . 300 men and 100 women were taken to Budzin/CAMP the rest were shot most of them by Veiks himself . They were forced to dig their own graves stand in front of them to be shot down . Then the other Jews had to bury them . Some of the shot Jews were still alive when they were buried and the earth still moved after the grave had been closed . On this occasion many atrocities were committed . Manfred particularly remembers how some Ukranian SS men found a little child in the street and chopped his head off . The Heymanns left with the transport to Budzin/CAMP on which Veiks took mainly German Jews while most of the Polish Jews were killed at Belsyce/CAMP . When they arrived at Budzin/CAMP Veiks sorted out more Polish Jews for extermination . He was a sadist who enjoyed killing . He would shoot a man he happened to meet because he did not like his face . The food and living conditions at Budzin/CAMP were appalling . The prisoners were divided into working parties called companies . They worked at the Heinkel Werke . When the companies marched outpast Veik the first morning to go to work Veiks saw Manfred with some other young boys at the back of the line and called them out . Manfred and the others begged for their lives so Veiks sent them to dig foundations for a block of flats being put up for German workers . At the end of the day he came to inspect their work and was satisfied . So they were spared . The camp had been originally started for Jewish P.O.W.s 5 and the Jewish Lagerkommandant Stockmann was kind to the prisoners . He arranged for the boys to work in the camp and Manfred worked the bellows for a blacksmith . Meanwhile Mrs Heymann peeled potatoes in the camp kitchen and Manfred was able to see her frequently . Later she did housework for a German worker from the factory and was able to smuggle food back into the camp for them . Old people in the camp were shot or sent to extermination camps . Anyone caught with jewelry or money was shot . Whenever anyone escaped 10 others were shot . If the escapee was caught he was shot or hanged depending on Veiks mood or desire for a public spectacle . People who brought in bread were flogged publicly . Bauchwitz a company leader was hanged for telling someone in the factory where he worked about conditions in the camp . The factory guards regularly searched the prisoners who worked there . Most of the prisoners had made themselves food containers . One Warsaw/GPE Jew had made his With a double bottom in which he kept gold . One day he left the container on his bench at the factory and the Werkschutz discovered the gold . That night at the camp he was undressed and every prisoner had to beat him . Veiks then finished the job by beating him to death personally . When three members of Mr Heymann company escaped 30 members of the company had to lie completely still in the yard all night . Anyone who moved was beaten by the guards with their rifle butts . Heymann survived this and was allowed into hospital . The rule in hospital was that anyone still there after a fortnight was shot . So Heymann came out after a fortnight . Veiks met him and told him he did not look well enough to be out of hospital told him to go back ! Eventually Veiks was transferred to the Eastern Front and his reign of terror at Budzin/CAMP was over . The new commandant Obersturmfuehrer Tauscher was more lenient . When a prisoner escaped only two were shot instead of ten . Camp discipline was slightly relaxed and it was possible to smuggle in bread without fear of penalty . At the end of 1943 the camp was changed from a Judenlager to a Konzentrationslager . Although this meant that the prisoners hair was shorn and they had to wear striped clothes the general conditions improved greatly overnight . The food was better . People were no longer shot when there was an escape . At this time there was one successful escape when the escapees stole guns from the Werkschutz at the factory and another when Jewish partisans drove up to the camp dressed as SS and removed a prisoner from under the SS nose . 6 Soon after the camp became a KZ half the prisoners were sent to Mielec/CAMP and the Heymanns were with this transport . Here they had to work 12 hours a day in the factory whilst their only food was a small quantity of Sauerkraut . The camp was vermin ridden and the prisoners slept on bare boards as the straw was too filthy . The oldest man in the camp was 50 and only the toughest survived . Mr Heymann became weaker and weaker . In 1944 all the prisoners were tattooed prior to being moved on to Wielizka/CAMP due to the Russian advance . Here they remained for only a week and then were transported to KZ/CAMP Flossenbuerg/CAMP in Bavaria/LOC . At Flossenbuerg/CAMP the food was better . The prisoners again worked in an aircraft factory . The Jews were in a minority in this camp which housed all nationalities . Altogether there were some 20 0 prisoners with 1000 to each block . The Block Leaders were mostly German criminals . The one in charge of Manfred block was a murderer . The various prisoners had to wear different tabs so that the guards could distinguish them easily . The Politicals prisoners wore green Criminals red Smugglers and black marketeers black Bibelforscher lilac POWs wore their country initials Germans wore triangles The Germans in the camp were better treated and they and the Czechs were allowed to receive food parcels . The Germans told the new arrivals that the camp had been hewn out of the rock by communist and social democrat prisoners . Mrs Heymann had not come to the camp with them but had remained in Poland/GPE . She eventually went to Belsen/CAMP which she survived . After liberation she went to Sweden/GPE but was suffering from ТВ of which she died in 1947 . In 1944 in Flossenbuerg/CAMP new transports of Jews came from Hungary/GPE . Although there were no shootings in the camp many died of starvation and exhaustion . In November that year Manfred father went to the camp hospital . He was discharged after some time as cured but died a few days later . As experiments were carried out on the prisoners in the hospital Manfred believes that he was poisoned . In January 1944 Eugen was taken off to another camp . Manfred never heard of him again . By March 1945 the conditions and food in the camp had deteriorated . But the prisoners morale was higher because they knew that the end was in sight . American and Russian airmen were shot almost daily in the camp prison . In April a fortnight before the liberation the Jews were taken off in a transport . 7 probably intended for Dachau/CAMP . The train in which the Jews were was machine gunned by American planes who presumably thought they were a troop transport . Some prisoners managed to escape in the confusion of the raids . Any who tried to get off the train to escape the machine gunning were shot by the Germans any who were injured were killed by the Germans anyway . After two days of this no locomotive could be found to take the train on and the transport started marching on foot There was bread and water for one day . After this no more food of any kind . The march continued for a week with people dying right and left from exhaustion and starvation . The march was made even harder by the fact that they were wearing wooden soled shoes . On the first day they were again attacked from the air . After this they marched at night and slept in the woods during the day . Even then they were machine gunned when they built a fire . Finally the SS guards marched the prisoners through a village where they heard that the Americans had caught up with them . The guards then left the prisoners in a wood beyond the village and disappeared . A few of the prisoners including Manfred now decided to return to the village in search of food at the risk of being caught and shot by Germans . Some of the other prisoners followed the SS guards who shot them . But Manfred and his companions reached the village without interference from the Germans who were by now too busy saving their skins to worry about anything else . They were given bread . Then at last they found the Americans and were safe . 
roll call in January 1943 the witness saw Dr. Clauberg who had come to select 50 women . The purpose of this was unknown to the prisoners but the witness who had been in Auschwitz/CAMP since 1942 and was so desperate that she volunteered . The women had to undress and when the witness answered the question as to whether she menstruated in the negative she was sent back . A few days later she heard that a new block was being established where nurses were wanted but rumours had it that she would have to collaborate with the SS so she did not apply . She obtained work in the camp laundry and in the course of her work heard about the dreadful experiments being carried out in Block 10 . Knowledge about the operations and their fatal results gradually spread and panic broke out whenever Dr. Clauberg appeared . He therefore frequently choose his victims from among the newly arriving transports . Later Block 10 was re sited and completely isolated behind barbed wire . It was not far from the staff building where the witness worked and she often heard screeming and moaning . She and all the others knew that transfer to Block 10 meant certain death . 9 . Further References Nurses in Block 10 Rija Hans and Sylvia Friedman . Testimony in the Criminal Proceedings Against the Late Prof. Carl Clauberg State Prosecuting Authority Prague . Prague/GPE 27 June 1957 . Minute of witness statement given in evidence . Interrogator Dr. Barbaš . Minute taker Pokorná . Medical expert witness MUDr . Jan Češpiva accredited medical expert under § 114 of the Penal Code . Witness Melanie Scheinová born 11.7.1920 in Námestkovo/GPE District of Nám/LOC . Domicile Prague/GPE 11 Baranava/LOC 2 . Occupation Manual worker . Former occupation household service . Evidence of identity Citizen identity card No . 267692 Series issued MOVB Prague/GPE 11 6 . 2 . 1956 Evidence reference VB 1942/56 . Testimony heard in criminal proceedings against Karl Clauberg . The witness was duly advised of her right under § 108 of the Penal Code to refuse to testify likewise of the importance of witness testimony in the public interest and of the consequences under § 109 of the Penal Code of making FALSE statements in evidence likewise of the opportunity that would be afforded under § 112 of the Penal Code to correct the minutes in accordance with her evidence . I think it was in January 1943 when we were paraded for roll call that a man in civilian clothes came who I found out later was Dr. Clauberg . We were told he would select fifty women but for what purpose was not disclosed . I myself had been in the concentration camp since about March 1942 . The situation in the Birkenau/CAMP concentration camp was so dreadful that the impression would arise immediately anyone in civilian clothes arrived as in this case that the purpose for which the women were being selected could not possibly be worse than the situation in the camp . I was among those who volunteered and five of us were brought before Dr. Clauberg . We were made to strip and were asked by Dr. Clauberg whether we menstruated . On hearing my reply that this was not the case he sent me away . Even at the time we felt this was strange . A few days later one of the women prisoners came 2 and reported that a block was being prepared inside the men camp in Auschwitz/CAMP it was Block No . 10 and that they required nurses there and that I could volunteer . I knew another prisoner who at one time had managed the laundry facilities and as I thought she would be better informed on the matter I asked her advice as to whether or not I should volunteer as a nurse for Block No . 10 . She advised me against this because it would be something that involved some kind of contact with the SS and in the event of the camp ever being dispersed they would execute us because we had knowledge of things that would be awkward for them . Later on I found myself in the Staff building where I worked in the laundry . This was between Birkenau/CAMP and Auschwitz/CAMP . The girls who worked there or had their accommodation there also went to the men camp in Auschwitz/CAMP . In this way we soon learned what was happening in Block No . 10 . It was experimentation on women being carried out there by Dr. Clauberg . It was now that I established that the civilian who had been selecting women earlier was the same man . We gradually got to hear more and more about the ghastly things they were doing in Block No . 10 i.e. the experiments on women mentioned earlier . We found out that mass deaths of women were happening during and after these experiments . This information spread through the camp . As a result there was immediate panic and scenes whenever Dr. Clauberg came to the camp to select women . The women prisoners knew from others about the atrocities being committed in the experimentation block No . 10 and wanted above all not to be taken there even though conditions in the camp were unbearable . For preference he would take women direct from the transports but if he did not get a sufficient number there he would pick out further women in the camp . I know that later Block No . 10 was moved to another location . That was shortly before the evacuation of the concentration camp . At this point they cordoned it off behind barbed wire but it was not far from the Staff building where I myself worked and often we heard screams and groaning coming from where these women were kept . From the accounts being passed on in the camp at this time I know that women from Block No . 10 were sent back to the Birkenau/CAMP concentration camp and would shortly afterwards die there as a result of their physical condition . I also know that these women were divided up between different places so that they would not be together as a group . I know from prisoners on so called work deployment that a certain number of women from Clauberg/LOC Block No.10 were sent back to Birkenau/CAMP and that those unable to work after their return were sent to the gas chambers immediately . Those who did work could usually only keep going for about three to four days . This meant that for all these women being sent back by Clauberg was synonymous with a death sentence . I knew some nurses and talked to them quite often e.g. 3 Rija Hans and they told me that in Block No . 10 the most dreadful things were being done and that if Dr. Clauberg so much as appeared in the block and was seen by the women it would drive them completely out of their minds for fear of the experiments . I know also that for example Sylvia Friedman worked in Block No . 10 . Read approved and signed . 
Sattler a well to do merchant in Krakow/GPE Poland/GPE was arrested together with 31 Jews and Poles and taken to the Gestapo to Prison/STREET St./STREET Michael on 11 September 1939 where seven prisoners were shot instantly the rest sent on to the Military prison Monte Lupich to Skwochowice/LOC near Mähr/LOC . Ostrau/LOC to the prison at Somorn/LOC and finally via Weimar/LOC to Buchenwald/CAMP horrible transport from 6 10 October 1939 . In order to take vengeance on the Jews for the so called Bier kellerputsch in Munich/GPE the SS distributed no food from 7 11 November 1939 and after that such food as to make everybody sick . Typhoid and spotted fever followed . On 15 January 1940 Mr Sattler and some hundred survivors of his group of originally were transferred through the camp doctor to a special barracks where political prisoners among them was Ernst Thaelmann took care of them p.2 . Horrible ill treatment through Kapos SS atrocities p.2 3 . Himmelfakrttransporte 1940 twice saved through Lagerältester Jupp . Murder camp for chemical experiments of I.G. Farben p.3 . Awful conditions on transport to Auschwitz/CAMP of 300 15 October 1942 160 gassed at arrival . Mr Sattler escaped declaring himself a locksmith . Ill treatment at road making . Dreams which came TRUE p.4 5 . For a murder a man would get a reward of 3 days leave and vodka . The Ukrainan Black Guard was inhumanly cruel and dangerous p.4 . Most critically ill after a kick from an SS man in 1944 Mr Sattler was operated on in a masterly way evidently by a Jewish surgeon but had to return back to work too early he has been suffering all the time since and will have to undergo another operation . Death march to Gleiwitz/CAMP on 18 January 1945 horrid transport to Buchenwald/CAMP 21 days march back to Poland/GPE at Krakow/GPE he learned that 31 of his near relatives had been murdered by the Nazis . Remarried he lives in Melbourne/GPE since 1950 where he runs a restaurant . 9 . Further References Lagerältester Heinemann Stephan Buchenwald/CAMP a Communist p.2 Extra Tortures to Speed Up Liquidation of Jews Report of the experiences in KZs concentration camps Buchenwald/CAMP Auschwitz/CAMP etc on the basis of Herr Salo S. Sattler communications b. 31 March 1907 Krakow/GPE . Herr Sattler lived in his native city as a well to do metal ware merchant specialising in tools . Since 1936 he had been married to Frau Rena née Fajner they had a son Jerry George and a daughter Salomea . After the German troops occupied Krakow/GPE on 5th September Gestapo arrested Herr Sattler on the 11th Sept. along with 31 Jews and Poles mostly journalists and took them to the Polish prison Sankt Michael Saint Michael which the Gestapo had taken over . During the second night they fetched seven of the detainees from the cells and shot them amongst them was an Orthodox Jew Herr Schickmann and his sons 18 and 16 years old . From there the remaining captives were taken to the military jail Montelupich/LOC where they were divided into different groups and subjected to gross ill treatment . After Yom Kippur they were transported to the Sammellager Skwochowice near had been converted from an old sugar refinery that had been de commissioned it possessed neither windows nor light and where approximately Jewish prisoners from Moravia/LOC and some from Poland/GPE had been rounded up . After a transitional stay of ten days in a normal prison Somornj a group consignment of 40 men to which Herr Sattler belonged were moved in closed cattle wagons the openings intended for the cattle had been closed off through barbed wire the journey to KZ/CAMP Buchenwald/CAMP lasted for three days and three nights . The journey took a major detour it stopped for one night in Wroclaw/LOC . On the 10th October 1939 a Sunday when the prisoners arrived in Weimar/CAMP they were forced to march the long stretch ten kms . uphill to the KZ Buchenwald/CAMP with hands on their hands during which the SS escort struck them with rifle butts without break . Those of the prisoners who broke down on the way were picked up by a truck that was following . In the KZ Buchenwald/CAMP Herr Sattler was placed in a tent camp which the SS ironically dubbed The Rose Garden it was the worst sort of place . Jewish prisoners were herded together to which number came as well Viennese Jews as a result of the so called September Aktion . Although the prisoners had to work dreadfully hard in the quarry their subsistence after about a month was fit only for dogs . As a revenge for the so called Bierkeller Putsch in Munich/GPE November were forced to go hungry for 94 hours during which the SS guards remarked ‘ You are supposed to die that going too slowly ! After that the inmates were given some herb soup as well as rotten and acrid salted cucumbers and when after that they drank water epidemics broke out dysentery and redwater fever from which 80 100 prisoners fell ill every day the entire camp was ailing . On top of dysentery and redwater fever came typhus and since the prisoners were gruesomely plagued by three different types of lice i.e. clothing hair and body lice tick typhus as well . In spite of the snow and biting cold the prisoners were obliged to live in mere tents – seven circus marquees with 500 men in each – from which they were collected to schlep stones this went on until Dec. 1939 when the camp physician established a state of quarantine at the tents and would not allow their inhabitants to go to work anymore . From 15th January 1940 the camp doctor took some hundreds of prisoners those remaining of the original and put them in a special hut inside the sickbay area where they were better treated and given food thanks to the solicitude of the political prisoners working there one of whom was Ernst Thälmann leader of the KPD German Communist Party . After the circus tents had been emptied the camp doctor had them incinerated for reasons of hygiene . Whereas Herr Sattler had weighed 81 kilos when arrested his body weight by now was down to 38 kilos when he was taken into the sickbay . His stomach had shrunk so much that he could only keep down two to three spoons of the camp evening meal . During the first period of his imprisonment he lost eight teeth three of which were knocked out by capos . After he had spent about two weeks in the sickbay he reached a hut which was managed by the Block Senior Stephan Heinemann a Communist and of the original 300 inmates only about 50 remained . After Herr Sattler had worked some weeks in the stone quarry an SS man threw him 11 metres downhill which broke a foot . When he was treated in the sickbay under the control of political prisoners he was placed in the Fahrkolonne transport crew consisting of 21 prisoners capos included one man on the trailer coupling who instead of horses had to load stones get rid of tree stumps transport bricks and deliver sand from the quarry for road building to do so they themselves had to push heavy trucks . When Herr Sattler fell ill with pleurisy he was treated by a construction worker who possessed no medical knowledge the latter punctured a blister like growth and drew out the pus which flowed into a bowl held by an assistant . During that process the construction worker noted that the patient was behaving very bravely during the intervention . When Herr Sattler had to return to the Fahrkolonne after some weeks he became so weak that he was hardly able to mount the three steps to the hut . Through the gift of a cigarette he obtained a few days respite before he was again obliged to return to work . When on one occasion three or four prisoners amongst them Herr Sattler took a puff on a cigarette an SS man caught and reported them whereupon each was hung by their arms from a tree for half an hour . Although the torture took place on a cold autumn day Herr Sattler became drenched with sweat and after the tree hanging he could not make use of his hands for six long weeks either for the food which he sipped nor for the completion of the act of defecation because his tendons had become powerless . At the beginning of 1940 a new doctor at the camp put together the so called ‘ Himmelfahrt Transport Ascension Day transport . 300 400 invalids in the camp all Jews were lined up in a death transport . At first the prisoners did not know what such transports entailed when however the clothes of the inmates who had been sent away were returned they knew what had happened . Herr Sattler was saved from a transportation to death because the Block Senior Jupp a Communist from Berlin/GPE fetched Sattler papers along with the documents of four other inmates in the sickbay with the result that Herr Sattler and the others names were not called by the roll call for the allocation to the death transportation . When Herr Sattler in order to get away from KZ/CAMP Buchenwald/CAMP volunteered for the office of a different camp it was likewise Jupp who advised him urgently not to because that camp was known as a death camp whereupon Herr Sattler resolved to remain in Sattler learned that it was an experiment barracks belonging to I.G. Farbenindustrie ? in which the prisoners were subjected roughshod to life threatening experiments . On the 16th October 1942 of the group of 350 Jewish prisoners only 50 young people remained behind in Buchenwald/CAMP KZ so as to take part in a bricklaying training course whereas the other them Herr Sattler were sent to Auschwitz/CAMP KZ in closed cattle wagons on a journey lasting three days . During the ride they were given no food and in each of those totally overfilled cattle wagons only a single bucket was available for urination and defecation . That bucket was completely unsuitable in size for the passengers to eliminate their faeces as a result they had no choice but to soil themselves4 in a sickening manner even if the deprivation of food and drink had a retarding affect on the functioning of their digestive and excretory organs . After they had arrived in Auschwitz/CAMP 18th October 1942 they were sorted into groups during the following day 160 of the 300 were sent at once to be gassed while 140 remained . One of whom was Herr Sattler who replied to a question by claiming he was a welder and 30 years old and so saved himself because business people and intellectuals were immediately liquidated . Since Herr Sattler knew that those who had a trade useful in the camp lasted longer he registered voluntarily as an electrician for he hoped to be employed in the installation of electric cables in the barracks however he was allocated to the putting up of high voltage transmission lines . He slipped off during that and could not do any further work because his hands were completely battered and weak . When he then came to road construction a terribly hard time for him ensued in which an SS man seriously wounded him by a blow with a rifle butt . After that he was employed as electrician and welder in the BUNA factory . In the night of 13th March 1942 he had an appalling dream he saw in the dream very clearly how his wife and his children were being followed on the street his son blond hair was sticky with blood . When he awoke in the middle of the night a camp comrade said to him ‘ What is the matter with you Sattler you screamed so terribly in your sleep ? In reply Herr Sattler narrated the content of his dream . After the war he learned from a Polish female servant who had earlier been in his employ and whom he later met in Krakow/GPE that on Saturday 13th March 1942 that is at the same time as he had the dreadful dream the Krakow/GHETTO ghetto had been liquidated during which his wife and his children perished . In particular Herr Sattler emphasised that events in the war led to reactions affecting the fates of the KZ/CAMP prisoners each victory by the Nazis – for example the conquest of Paris/GPE Mussolini entry in the war or the capture of Crete/LOC – was so to speak a defeat for the inmates because the SS then felt less restrained than ever in treating the prisoners with appalling brutality . If one of them was murdered with some excuse or other the SS man would be given vodka and three days holiday . Just as dangerous as the SS were the so called Black Guard of the Ukrainians which consisted of 17 or 18 year old fellows they were as stupid as they were inhumanly cruel . On the basis of his experiences Herr Sattler declared that he was convinced that any animal who had experienced the burden of suffering which the KZ inmates were subjected to would have long ago been broken .. In 1944 an SS man gave Herr Sattler a brutal kick in his stomach the latter realised the blow had serious consequences in his abdomen he was then in a critical state for weeks after without being allowed to report to the sickbay . When however he then collapsed and could neither swallow nor eat nor walk he managed to makecontact with friends of his in the sickbay where a Communist Silmann from Częstochowa/LOC admitted him at that time a number of Jewish medical specialists were working there . When on the 20th June 1944 Herr Sattler was operated on he was already in a highly critical condition . The surgeon after opening the abdominal cavity established that 1-Mar of his stomach gallbladder and duodenum were already septic he removed them by mean of a surgical intervention . After that Herr Sattler through the use of a half litre of ether fell ill with pneumonia in both lungs . Sadly Herr Sattler has completely forgotten the name of the surgeon . On the other hand he recalls the names of two of the assisting doctors Dr Budziavrek from Krakow/GPE and Dr Silber from the Ruhrgebiet/LOC . It is thanks to the excellent reputation which Herr Sattler enjoyed in the camp that the doctor carried the operation out at all afterwards the surgeon told him ‘ Sattler for anybody else I would have simply stitched you up i.e. let him die because his case was hopeless . Herr Sattler was one of the so called Old 68ers i.e. he had the number 68652 whereby he belonged to the group of prisoners originating from Buchenwald/CAMP KZ whom the SS ironically dubbed the old . Although Herr Sattler stayed alive due to the operation he was released too early from the sickbay and sent back to work . As a result the stitches in his stomach burst and even today his abdomen has still only partially healed only another operation which Herr Sattler has still not been able to have – would resolve those medical issues . Because of the physical abuse he suffered Herr Sattler has become 70 % invalided . When the Buna Factory was liquidated on the 18th January 1945 the surviving prisoners were forced to undertake a Todesmarsch death march to Gliwice/LOC lasting two days and a night without any food during which many died underway . Herr Sattler attributes his survival during both that death march and the entire period of suffering to a curious dream which he had during the beginning of his time in KZ/CAMP Buchenwald/CAMP his father who had died a year earlier appeared to him in his dream and shook his hand and said to him ‘ You are going to survive ! Herr Sattler reported that this experience in his dream gave him the spiritual power to survive everything . Those prisoners who managed to reach Gliwice/LOC – amongst them Herr Sattler – had to travel back to Buchenwald/CAMP KZ eight days and eight nights in an open coal wagon without any cover or food and drink as a result Herr Sattler was completely exhausted and could no longer move his feet . However thanks to his friends he could find a place in the sickbay of Buchenwald/CAMP KZ where he was able to remain until American troops on the 14th April 1945 liberated its surviving inmates . Before the liberation some hundreds of prisoners had yet to undertake a Todesmarsch/LOC . When Herr Sattler left there on the 7th May 1945 he was personally convinced that no member of his family was still living . But since he held it to be his duty and obligation to find out the exact facts he walked 500 kms in a group of three for 21 days in springtime on a long way round towards Krakow/GPE the three men only fed themselves underway on some lettuces and potatoes . From Kattowitz/LOC Herr Sattler was able to travel by train to Krakow/GPE when he arrived there he made his way to the cemetery the marble of the burial places had been stolen and as an aftermath of his suffering he was seized with a suicidal mood . Nevertheless he pulled himself together and recalled an address which a Pole had given him when he had suffered from a broken foot in Buchenwald/CAMP KZ . On the way there by chance he met a Polish slaughterer whom he told that he had met a Polish slaughterer in Buchenwald/CAMP KZ whereupon the Polish man invited him to his house where he stayed an hour and drank vodka . He found out that 31 members of his family – amongst them his wife his mother his brother a nephew who was a doctor – had been murdered by the Nazis . Herr Sattler then spent three years in Wroclaw/LOC which was under Polish rule where he founded a large metal ware shop which still exists today though in nationalised form . In 1947 he married again in Wroclaw/LOC his second wife née Fass is a trained biologist . They had two sons Stephan and Albert . In 1949 Herr Sattler and his wife went to Vienna/GPE and from there after six months they emigrated to Melbourne/GPE Australia/GPE he arrived there on 3rd May 1950 and since then has run a restaurant in which his second wife works with him assiduously . I have checked the report prepared by Dr Fritz Friedlander on the basis of my communications and find it to be correct . Melbourne/GPE 22.9.1958Signed SALO S. SATTLER 
author witnessed the heartrending scenes during the selections for the mass deportations to Duenamünde/LOC . In a poignant manner he describes how first the rumour of a new camp with good conditions was spread by the SS among the starving people of the Riga/GHETTO Ghetto . Then on 26 February 1942 a roll call of the entire population of the Ghetto was ordered and after repeated counts and hours of waiting in the freezing cold the Camp Commander whip in hand appears and tells the horror stricken crowd of the new camp and its excellent equipment . He then callously proceeds to select persons for Dünamünde/LOC . These are ordered to report the next morning . On 27 February 1942 early in the morning heavy lorries arrive and at great speed and with many brutalities the victims are loaded onto them . At the last moment the commander and his minions at random seize another 100 persons and push them on the lorries . Hardly an hour later the lorries return empty but for the clothing of the owners who have gone to their mass grave Dünamünde/LOC . Duenamünde/LOC Yonder/LOC where the wide stream of the Duena/LOC flows into the waters of the North Sea like a cornucopia one finds on the flat beach and on the brim of spacious woodland that stretches down the cost many isolated farmhouses and small sttlements whose inhabitants mainly earn their livelihood by fishing and by cultivating the rich grassland and the fertile fields . The war brought many hardships to these people but at the time when our tragedy took place there they had not been troubled with actual combat scenes and the general horrors of war . Ships of the Battle Fleet cruised the sea and sometimes one could see speeding vessels in the distance whose grey or black smoke trail lingered on the horizon long after they had disappeared . Units of the German Navy were posted as sentries along the coast and frequently the sound of whistling shots could be heard which had been fired from machine guns and small cannons at enemy aircraft flying over the district . This took place from February 1942 until the end of 1943 on the soil of Latvia/GPE yonder where the Duena/LOC flows into the sea . The serene calm of this peaceful landstrip was at that time ingeniously used by the SS Command . They decided to propagate the idea Duenamuende . Cunningly they allowed rumours to spread that approximately 20 kilometres from the Ghetto of Riga/GHETTO lay the Port of Duenamuende and that there a few thousand people would be taken into newly errected comfortable camps . The Jewish orderlies appointed by the SS in the Riga/GHETTO Ghetto were instructed and ordered to mention Duenamuende/LOC to everyone in the Ghetto quarters Duenamuende/LOC was supposed to be a lovely spot on the coast . Many people were needed there for work in the Labour Unit Arbeitseinsatz . The new camp was said to be very clean and well planned much better conditions and less overcrowded than the narrow unhygienic quarters of the Ghetto . The inmates of the Ghetto needed more room and improved conditions and some relief measures were necessary . The rumours about Duenamuende rapidly went from mouth to mouth and whilst many unattached people had become familiar with the idea of 2 being transferred to another camp the majority of the Ghetto inmates trembled for their families and the idea of separation and goodbye . It is the 26th February 1942 . At 6 in the morning all the inmates of the Ghetto had to assemble . The house stewards group leaders the orderlies the leaders of labour units the leaders of columns and finally the camp eldest all were made responsible for everyone being present . This also included all sick people . Those unable to walk and serious hospital cases are to be listed by names . All children have to be present and next to them came the doctors and the medical service personnel . 30 degrees below zero . The hard frozen snow grates under the feet of many thousand people . An icy wind makes the eyes water and the cheeks are covered with layers of ice . Eyebrows and beards are covered with a crust of ice and seem snow bedecked . Most people are still hungry from the previous day . The orderlies race into every room and billet and press for extra speed . Frightened eyes and twitching faces show signs of fear and terror . Our instinct tells us to expect the worst . Slowly the quarters are emptied . The people move in groups along the main street of the Ghetto and it is difficult to move on as everywhere on the road there is nothing but pure slippery ice . Old parents are led by their children small kids cling to the hands and coats of their mother or father . Many people slip and fall expecially when the SS appears . Everyone is driven and chased to the greatest possible speed . Many are hit with butt ends or kicked . The main street can not hold the masses . Therefore a number of the people are assembled in side streets . It takes some time before the people are ordered into straight lines and in rows . Lists are produced . Names are read out . Everyone responsible is asked whether all are present . Then they count the people . One twice five times again eight times . The lists are compared and discussed . Several Scharfuehrer of the SS appear . They too want to know many things and begin to ask questions . Then they turn to the hospital doctors and instruct them which patients are to be got ready for the transport . Two hours have gone by since we were assembled . Men women children the frail and the sick . The cold cramps the bodies . Faces ears and feet hurt terribly . Children cry . Subdued soft moaning but audible nevertheless . A 3 woman falls down she has fainted . Another one over there and one just opposite . Now an elderly man falls and does not get up . He is shaken and pulled . A medical orderly races up . Dead ! he says . Put him in a ditch along the road . He can be removed later says a Schafuehrer . Many collapse owing to the cold . The feet seem to freeze off . Despite orders a general trampling and moving of feet begins because no one is able to stand still any longer . Many cry with cold . Stand still is being bellowed again and again . Faces are smacked and stomachs are punched . Three terrible hours have passed . It is 9 . At last the command is heard ... ! Stand straight . Stand still . A big saloon car passes the barrier at the entrance of the Ghetto . It is full of SS and slowly rolls along the main street . The car stops in front of the assembled Scharfuehrer who salute smartly . The commander is the first to alight from the car and to receive reports . All assembled and present . The commander and his officers salute their subalterns with Heil Hitler . The salute is repeated by the NCOs with arm raised stiffly . Then with half closed eyes the commander musters the long lines of unfortunate people . An officer takes snaps . He picks out types and lets them step forward old unshaven men in rags miserable starved women . A young girl with a lovely face and hair she is on the verge of collapse through the cold but has to smile invitingly . The officer demands it . The dead man lying in the ditch is also being photographed . In the meantime the commander confers with the other officers and the Scharfuehrer who have been called aside . At last he takes off one fur glove puts up the collar of his coat pulls his cap so that it forms a jaunty angle unfolds a piece of paper and speaks . Attention everybody . Pause . Then a few subdued followed by breath taking silence . The voice again . You have undoubtedly all heard of Duenamuende/LOC . A new camp is to be started there . You will have modern clean billets In Duenamuende/LOC . Much better than here in the Ghetto . Not so cramped much more comfrotable and cleaner . Many fishing nets need mending in Duenamuende/LOC and tins are to be manufactured there . The work in Duenamuend/GHETTO is easy and a sedantry one . I therefore mainly require elderly people who are unfit for heavy manual work . I shall supply you with doctors 4 nursing personnel medicine and dressing material . Of course everything else that goes with a camp will be given to you . Food will be sent to you from the Ghetto . Our lorry will call on you every day with provisions . You will find the new camp ready to receive you . No one is to take anything with him is that understood ? I do not mind if you take some food but nothing else is that clear ? Thus sounded the military curt words of our superior uttered in a rattling tone . Then with his staff he passed through the rows of people . How old ? Occupation ? Hm hm . Fall out to the left . You too and you and you and you . Then turning to one of the Scharfuehrer ...... and these entire two rows there . Come here Scharfuehrer Mueller . Over there those old women all of them . Mueller Certainly Sir . Commander Here the front row and at the back there this old man . Yes this one . And there on your right the one with the cheeky face let the blighter step forward . Then turning round How old are you doctor ? 69 Sir replied the man . Take him too says the commander . Scharfuehrer he yells . Yes Sir . Start counting them . Yes Sir . After a while . How many have you counted up to now ? Sir . Ah not nearly enough . I need many more for Duenamuende . What is the matter with you ? I work with Command Reichsbahn II Sir . Nonsense ! I shall give them a younger bloke ! Quick quick fall out to the left join the others . What are you doing you there at the back the one with the high head ! I am a butcher I work with the slaughterhouse command . Then your good days are over join the others quick march . And you Sarah you too are going to Duenamuende/LOC . Do pull such a stupid face . There are many more going there beside you . So do get excited . Among those selected for Duenamuende/LOC I see an old couple whom I know well . People from my native country . A young woman slips out of her group marching on the opposite side and joins the old couple . Glancing sideways the commander has noticed the incident . He plants himself infront of the Deserter and orders her back to your row at the same time he swings his riding whip . The young woman is the daughter of the 5 two old people and falling on her knees she implores the commander to send her to Duenamuende/LOC with her parents . The commander to her If you insist I do care but you are making the biggest mistake of your life . The young woman replies Please Sir I want to go . The commander thinks for a few seconds then Well my child if you must I wo stop you . At last even the gentlemen think it has lasted long enough . The commander and his retinue feel the cold too much and begin to feel uncomfortable . Now everything is done at the double . The commander in his nasal voice You you you you ..... this woman there that one that one and that ...... wherever his hand happens to point . In the end whole rows are selected out of the group of assembled people and destined for Duenamuende/LOC . Thus people are collected . An SS camp leader speaks Those selected for the transport to Duenamuende/LOC have to gather on the assembly place tomorrow early in the morning . Is that clear ? The exact time will be made known during the day . Have you understood ? ......... Then Fall out all of you back to your quarters ! ..... By now it is twelve noon . Fear worry and anxiety was in the hearts and showed on the faces of those who had not been selected . They could not show any emotion during the selection as the intense cold had frozen their features into immobility but now they slowly began to come to life . Silently they drag themselves back to the quarters . Soon the streets are empty and deserted . Those who were hungry forget about it .... A car is heard to start and the noice of the engine slowly dies down in the distance . Death at DUENAMUENDE/LOC . 27th February 1942 . For many the last day of their lives . It is less cold than on the previous day . Also the assembly time has been fixed for 8.30am . Even a pale morning sun greets the unfortunate ones who stand ready for the transport to Duenamuende/LOC . It has become very quiet in the Ghetto . All those employed have long ago left the camp with its barbed wire enclosure and in long columns led and guarded by armed sentries they have started their slave labour . For the time being they have escaped the selection for Duenamuende/LOC 6 They have said goodbye to their beloved ones to their friends and acquaintances those heart rending handshakes last embraces words of good luck glances trembling with fear worry and anxiety and in some cases even showing a spark of hope despite everything all this they have already left behind them . The command Duenamuende/LOC is awaiting collection . Excited murmurs go from one to the other eyes ask questions . We know what they are asking what they would like to kniw we know how they feel . Nobody can however give them the answer . Heavy lorries draw up . They wait . Their drivers and crew have been summoned to the commander . Doubtlessly they are receiving last minutes orders and instructions A messenger announces The commander is coming . Smoking a cigarette and apparently in excellent mood the mighty one arrives . He who loves to be called King of Judea/LOC during his carousels and when drunk appears with several SS Unterfuehrer . He enquires whether all are present and if verything is prepared for the trip . He does not even bother to glance at the waiting crows . Suddenly he decides to look personally into the quarters . Whip in hand he chases people before him whom he collected from working places rooms and even the street . Fifty in all . Following his example a few Scharfuehrer drive another hundred people together . They all have to join those already waiting . The engines of the transport lorries are started . It wo be long now . The first lorry pulls up . The first batch has to climb into it . In order to speed up matters the SS Men in TRUE SS fashion help the people by beating kicking and pushing them . Greatest speed has been ordered and stern discipline they say . Hardly half an hour has gone by and all the vehicles are filled with people . More than 2.6 human beings have been loaded into the lorry caravans and are being driven away .... Very soon the passengers to Duenamuende/LOC will have vanished from our sight . 27th February 1942 . Same morning . Hardly an hour later . All the vehicles which had just despatched more than people are back again on the car park of the Riga/GHETTO Ghetto . 7 They are loaded with coats frocks suits underwear and shoes . All these wear garments have a yellow star bearing the inscription JEW . There are also many handbags small parcels with bread and bottles filled with coffee among the things on the lorries . The owners of these articles are already in DUENAMUENDE/LOC . This is the name the SS gave to their massgrave . DUENAMUENDE/LOC ! DUENAMUENDE/LOC ! 
report written by an anonymous author obviously a German Jewess who returned from Holland/GPE to Germany/GPE on 1 Februry 1935 . She duly reported her return to the police and after about 3 weeks she was interrogated at the Stapo offices Alexanderplatz Berlin/GPE . She declared that in Holland/GPE she had neither engaged in any political activities nor kept contact with refugees . Under some pretext the interrogating official led her to the police prison for women where Assessor Allass the official in charge of Jewish emigration matters signed a warrant for her arrest . She was told that she would be kept in preventive custody until being transferred to the ‘ educational camp Schulungslager Moringen/CAMP near Hanover/LOC . She was kept in a prison cell for 7 women all classified as political suspects . One of these women had returned from Brazil/GPE on doctor orders having contracted typhoid and yellow fever . The German consulate in Rio/GPE de/GPE Janeiro/GPE had paid half of her return passage . The police prison was clean the treatment decent . Short visits from outside were permitted after a week . Two days before the scheduled transfer to Moringen/LOC i.e. on 9 April 1935 the author mother succeeded in obtaining her release on the strength of a railway ticket to  Amsterdam/GPE on condition that the author would leave Germany/GPE within 3 days . On 12 April 1935 her passport was returned to her at Bentheim/LOC on the German Dutch frontier . Preventive Custody for a ‘ Returnee 1935 On 1 February I went back to Germany/GPE via Zevesaar/LOC Cranenburg . After I had registered with the police on 8 February I was summoned to appear at the STAPO Staatspolizei police headquarters Alexanderplatz/LOC Berlin/GPE . I was informed that this had been common procedure for some time without any consequences . To be on the safe side I contacted Dr Kreuzberger once again before going to the STAPO but he had not heard anything about arrests or unpleasant consequences . I promised to let him know how things went . On 22 February the STAPO recorded in writing the statements I made on being interrogated by a detective superintendent . I stated that I had neither engaged in political activity abroad nor was I a member of any party whatsoever I had not contacted any refugees did not know of any places where refugees used to meet had not demanded any money from any committee for my journey home etc . They asked me what foreigners thought about Germany/GPE . I answered that I had never cared about politics and had never discussed such topics . To their question about whether I had ever been kept in preventive custody or in a concentration camp I answered ‘ No . Meanwhile I could tell that they were asking various police stations in Berlin/GPE whether my passport was in order . Of course it was . Now I thought I would be allowed to go home but instead I was led by an official through a labyrinth of corridors and staircases and suddenly I read the words ‘ police cell block . The official pretended to need a signature and told me to go with him . Assessor Allass the official in charge of Jewish emigration matters was just inspecting the women cell block and signed a warrant for my preventive custody . I was suddenly trapped . At my request to tell me why I was being arrested he only answered ‘ You will be taken to the educational camp at Mooringen/GPE near Hanover/GPE and until then you will stay here . By entreating and begging him I managed with the help of a little trick to make him 2 at least inform my parents . After a thorough body search I was taken to a room shared by seven women . They were all political suspects so I knew straightaway that I was being treated as a political case . From the girls I learnt that in another room there was a Jewess who had been living in Palestine/GPE for two years had a Jewish husband and was now back in Berlin/GPE to visit her mother . As she had wanted to earn some money in Berlin/GPE for her journey home to Erez she had registered with the police who put her straight into preventive custody . In my room there was another Jewess who had gone to Brazil/GPE with her six year old son the year before as her husband had got a job there . She contracted typhoid and yellow fever spent six months in a Brazilian hospital and was strongly advised by the doctors to return to Europe . The German consulate in Rio/GPE offered to pay 50 per cent of her return passage . This woman was also kept in preventive custody although she required more medical treatment immediately . They wanted to put the child into an orphanage but he was allowed to stay with his grandparents . Our ‘ cases were increasing from day to day until there were ten Jewesses together in a separate room . Everything was spotlessly clean . At first the female guards were distant with us but later when they learnt from us why we were imprisoned they were really nice and humane . We were allowed to send post once a week letters took one week within Berlin/GPE – really strict censorship . For example I wrote to my parents that I had been arrested on the basis of a new regulation of 1 February 1935 which decreed that all Jewish emigrants returning from abroad were to be put into preventive custody . This sentence had been made illegible and the next one too in which I had written that we would be taken to Mooringen/GPE. After one week a first short visit of ten minutes was permitted . Meanwhile my parents had been to all the Jewish organisations in Berlin/GPE and had learnt that I was not the only who had been treated in this way . Then the woman from Palestine/GPE was released on condition that she would return to Erez/GPE within three days . Although my case was different – people from Palestine/GPE are treated more generously in Germany/GPE – I told my mother at the next visiting time that she should immediately try to obtain my release by arguing that I would leave Germany/GPE 3 within a given timespan . It would take too much time to describe all the ways my mother now went about this . All this happened on Saturday 9 March . On Monday 11 April we were to be transported to Mooringen/CAMP . I would like to point out that all these so called ‘ educational camps and ‘ community camps were nothing but ordinary concentration camps which had recently been given new names . By the Saturday my mother had succeeded in getting me out of prison supplied with a ticket to  Amsterdam/GPE . It was my last chance . It was completely uncertain how long I would have been in the camp . At worst one must reckon on a year . Obtaining release from a camp is much more difficult . I had to give back my warrant for the preventive custody and to sign another document which said that I would never be permitted to enter Germany/GPE again and that I would never make any claims on the Reich . Otherwise I would face preventive custody and a concentration camp . They held on to my passport . I had three days left before my departure . I had to collect my passport from a detective superintendent in Bentheim/GPE . On the morning of 12 April I crossed the German Dutch frontier so I had been kept in preventive custody for sixteen days . Those in custody who had money on them had to pay 1.5 RM per day . Of course board and lodging were not worth that much as we got the usual prison food breakfast 0.75 litres of acorn coffee without milk and sugar and for the first five days one slice of dry bread later bread and jam . Lunch dried vegetables made into soup or some other thick and very hot soup . In the evening soup again and for the first five days dry bread later bread and lard . Every day we were led along with the other prisoners around the prison courtyard for half an hour in single file keeping a distance of five feet apart . It was strictly forbidden to speak – otherwise an isolation cell ! ! 
Eisenstaedt who had received the Cross of Honour for war widows the Cross of Merit and a diploma for social work in Stettin/GPE was managing her own factory at the beginning of the Nazi regime . As she was no longer allowed to sell her goods to German enterprises she was forced to sell her factory . She started a retail business but this too was destroyed by boycott . In 1937 Mrs Eisenstaedt emigrated to Sweden/GPE . Boycott against a Jewish War Widow in Stettin/GPE Ms Eisenstädt comes from Mecklenburg/LOC . After getting married she moved to Szczecin/GPE where she lived until her relocation to Stockholm/GPE . Ms Eisenstädt first husband Mr Brotzen died from complications caused by a war injury shortly after the end of the First World War and her second husband died at the start of Hitler rule . These misfortunes twice forced Ms Eisenstädt to earn her own income . In the report that follows she tells us about her experiences in Pomerania/CAMP . There was talk that intellectuals were joining associations affiliated with Hitler as far back as 1923 and in 1933 they were given key positions in the Hitler movement . Antisemitism became more noticeable then too . I remember making a journey in Pomerania/CAMP in 1929 and on the train hearing rumours about a Jew I knew – the sort of sexual fables and fairy tales that would later appear in the newspaper Der Stürmer The Fighter . Hitler boycott in 1933 hit all Jews in the affected area hard as many had been in the same location for generations and had come to be highly respected . It was mostly factory cereal and banking businesses that suffered alongside doctors and lawyers who were very popular amongst the inhabitants of the relatively small towns . A cousin of mine ran a shop in his own property in Bergen/LOC on the island of Rügen/LOC . He had never suffered at the hands of Antisemitism and was highly regarded by the public . However a swastika flag was hoisted up at his home in conjunction with the boycott efforts and he committed suicide . At his funeral the local priest alluded very clearly to the regime in place at the time . As I was allowed to sell any goods to German companies from the factory I owned I started my own retail business . Of course I was soon boycotted as a Stürmer vendor stood on one side of the shop entrance and a photographer stood on the other side of the second entrance . A large number of passers by gradually gathered in front of the shop so I approached them and spoke to them . The public sympathised with me but they were afraid of the regime . I pointed out that I was a war widow that I had been awarded the Order of Merit by the Kaiser during the First World War 2 and the Cross of Honour for War Widows by Hindenburg and that I had been honoured for my own work during the war . I was also awarded a diploma by the city of Szczecin/GPE as a token of gratitude for my social work during the First World War . I had trained hundreds of soldiers wives and war widows to work to meet the army demands despite the fact that they had barely known what to do with a sewing needle . The company I had rented my shop from ended my rental agreement with three months notice because they were not allowed to have Jewish tenants . It was at that point that I realised that one Jewish business after the other was ending up in Aryan hands and I could come up with a long list of businesses in that situation . Most of my relatives had been transported to Theresienstadt/GHETTO and some had been sent to other concentration camps . They all died . Lots of my friends from Szczecin/CAMP had been deported to Poland/GPE and died in the ghettos that had been set up near Lublin/CAMP . As for me I managed to escape this horrifying fate thanks to my son forcing me to stay in Stockholm/LOC during a visit in 1937 as I had been completely broken . So I left everything in Szczecin/CAMP behind . 
Schoengut an Austrian Jew lived in Berlin/GPE and emigrated to Holland/GPE in 1933 . Until the Nazi invasion the Schoengut lived quite comfortably as the Dutch refugee committees and Jewish Community Council helped the refugees . When the Nazis invaded Holland/GPE in May 1940 Schoengut was at first allowed to continue working as an interior decorator . He worked for Alois Miedl a banker and friend of Goering for whom he re decorated Schloss Goudstikker . After the promulgation of the anti Jewish laws in May 1942 all Jews had to register with the Gestapo Judenamt at Euterpestraat/STREET and hand in all their assets and valuables . These were banked with the bank of Lippmann Rosenthal & amp Co. who had been dispossessed . The Judenamt was later bombed by the RAF . With the help of a Christian Dutchman non Jews helping Jews Mr Bennick Bolt Schoengut could hide his jewellery and another helped the Schoengut to go Underground Maarten Hulst . They found shelter with De Graan Orthelius Kade 75 and in particularly dangerous times and during the frequent raids they hid in a specially built coal bunker . Practically all the inhabitants of the Ghetto who had not gone into hiding were taken to the Schouburg/LOC and from there to Westerbork/CAMP . On 3 September 1944 the Frantic Tuesday it was erroneously rumoured that the Germans were fleeing and many Jews left their hide outs and were arrested . The winter of 1944 was the worst time due to strikes and the break down of rationing . But by then the Resistance distributed forged papers stolen ration cards and organised a warning system before raids . A Hungarian Jew Pollak initiated this but when he was arrested he turned traitor . He even betrayed his own friend Geza Weisz who died in Auschwitz/CAMP and the Swiss Dr. Rimatha who had sheltered Weisz and who was murdered in Buchenwald/CAMP . Pollak was later killed by a member of the Resistance . When  Amsterdam/GPE was liberated in May 1945 only out of Dutch Jews had survived . 9 . Further references Rienstra van Stuyvenzande Christian employer in  Amsterdam/GPE . Schouwburg/GPE  Amsterdam/GPE its fate after the war . Frantic Tuesday Herr Heinrich Schoengut an engineer and interior architect by trade graduated from the University of Vienna in 1915 and then moved to Berlin/GPE where he worked until 1933 . As an Austrian national he was considered an alien by the Nazis and treated accordingly . He could not however abide the nature of National Socialism and emigrated to Holland/GPE with his wife Maria in August 1933 . Like all refugees they were warmly received by the Dutch and received all sorts of willing offers of help . For the Dutch this help was of a purely humane kind and they did not see their mission as a specifically Jewish cause . Herr Schoengut was immediately able to practise his profession and Frau Schoengut also managed to find work as a designer after a short while . At that time there were Jewish and general committees for refugee aid . Debates were held at the Amsterdam Gemeinderat council allowing orthodox Jews who closed their shops on Saturdays to open them on Sundays . When the Dutch foreign envoys warned the Dutch about the Germans in 1939 even on 9th May 1940 the Dutch would not believe them . Even after the Germans had invaded Holland/GPE Herr Schoengut was able to carry on working until 1941 . One of his last jobs was for a banker Alois Miedl a friend of Göring who was married to a Jewish woman and who knew that Herr Schoengut was Jewish . Herr Miedl had appropriated the castle owned by Goudstikker an art dealer and tasked Schoengut with its renovation . At the same time Herr S. was working for the director of the same bank Rienstra van Stuyvenzande who later also became a Nazi . His brother in law was a high ranking Nazi leader . When Herr Schoengut made a legitimate complaint about the doings of a Nazi company he was not only forced to stop working but was also threatened with the concentration camp . From 10th to 14th May the Dutch put all Germans under house arrest . On the 14th they were freed by the Germans and Herr and Frau Schoengut like all Jews immediately purchased some poison . They also hid their jewellery which a Christian Dutch notary Herr Bennink Bolt buried in his garden . This Herr B.B. was a wonderful person who risked his life to help the Jews . When dealing with transactions for Jewish people he refused to take money for his work . He documented against the Germans whatever was asked of him . He would visit those in hiding of his own accord in their hiding places . After the anti Jewish laws came into force on 1st May 1942 freedom of movement for Jewish people came completely to an end . The yellow badge had to be worn vehicles of any kind could not be used businesses could not be entered 2 and streets had to be cleared by 8 in the evening . Soon afterwards inventories of dwellings started to be compiled . This meant that officials would make a list of all the contents of a home . Jewellery also had to be handed in . All Jewish people had to make an official application to emigrate which was to be handed in at Euterpe Straat the headquarters of the Gestapo Judenamt . In 1943 or 44 the English deliberately bombed this school building in order to destroy all existing material . This was the building where people entire fortunes as well as jewellery and silver had to be handed in . Everything was taken to a bank the owners of which were Jewish but who of course were no longer at the bank . The name of this bank was Lippmann Rosenthal and this has been a notorious name ever since . There were no underground organisations yet at that time . Like others Herr and Frau Schoengut began looking for an underground hiding place . A foreign Dutchman a teacher called Maarten Hulst helped them to find such a hiding place he also provided Jewish people with ration cards and provided assistance wherever he was asked to help . He was later arrested for these actions but took up his aid work again immediately after his release . On 13th June 1942 he found a young married couple of low status – they were from a working class family – in  Amsterdam/GPE who offered them an empty room in their flat to hide in . Their name was De Graan Orthelius Kade 75 . This ordinary couple were of a nervous disposition . But their desire to help was so strong that they overcame their nerves . As with all people in hiding S. could not make themselves noticeable in any way . They could not speak loudly they could not go out their presence must not be revealed by anything or anyone . Half of those in hiding were exposed through carelessness . This young married couple were very poor and yet they consistently refused to take money from S. They must have been made to since they had to constantly spend money on feeding the family as well . When the labour service raids started in June 1942 S. were already in hiding but they returned to their own home after a few days . S. did not comply with a summons for labour service . On 7th August however such a major raid took place that Herr S. had to spend the night on his neighbours floor and they moved into their hiding place the next day . There they devised a place to hide which was necessary for when homes were being searched . They built a platform inside a deep wall cupboard which was used for storing coal by shovelling out the coal and creating a hollow space with boards – big enough for 2 people to be able to lie inside – and shovelled the coal back in . Then they spent a long time practising going to hide so that they could calculate to the second how long it would take in an emergency . Raids were a frequent event between 1942 and 44 mostly on Saturday evenings . Especially in the Jewish/GHETTO ghetto in east  Amsterdam/GPE . The entire Jewish proletariat was rounded up and exterminated . There were Jewish people who moved back there who had a special stamp and thought themselves to be safe . The Nazis however simply did not acknowledge the stamp and they were all sent to Westerbork/CAMP . They were all made to report at the Hollandsche Schouwburg a theatre which was being used as a transit stop . After the war the Dutch no longer wished to use this building as a place of entertainment because it was associated with too much horror . Non Jews bought the building and offered it as a gift to the/GPE State/GPE of/GPE Israel/GPE to create a sort of Jewish cultural centre there . 3 Israel/GPE had to refrain from accepting the gift as the expense of using and maintaining the building would be too great . At this time of large scale raids Herr Schoengut like so many other Jewish people kept watch the whole night so that he could alert people in good time . During these vigils at an open window he would often see the Nazis but they never stepped into his building . 3rd September 1944 was the date of so called Frantic Tuesday . It was believed that the Allies had advanced all the way to Rotterdam/LOC and both Dutch and German Nazis began to flee . The oppressed people breathed a sigh of relief and a large number of them came out of their hiding places . Unfortunately it had only been a rumour and several of those who had left their hideouts were now arrested . 17th September saw Montgomery failed airstrike on Arnhem/LOC . This was followed by the great general strike of the railways which led to the hardest winter of the whole war . There was nothing to eat . Even ration cards got people nothing because there was simply nothing left . The weekly ration was 400 g of bread and 1 kg of potatoes . Anyone who could get hold of tulip bulbs cooked those . Herr S. lost 40 pounds in weight that winter . He suffered swelling from malnutrition and temporary memory loss . Frau S. had gall bladder problems and was generally in a weak condition with high blood pressure and her memory was also debilitated . During this winter of starvation there was no fuel to be found either since all transport facilities had stopped . People would pull trees out of the streets at night . Houses in the Jewish quarter which were lying empty were looted and anything in them that was combustible was smashed into pieces and taken away . Dead bodies could not be transported and were piled up inside a church . Many families attempted to cross over to Friesland/GPE to get something to eat there . In February and March 45 Herr and Frau S. were in hiding in the building next to their old flat . They walked the considerable distance from one hiding place to the other at night . They managed to get to the new space without being challenged . Another time Frau S. was suffering from severe toothache and had to go to the dentist . A woman took her under a FALSE name to a dentist whom she could trust . Frau S. was terrified of what the cost would be as by then they had no money left . She was prepared for an extremely high bill and how she beamed when the dentist told her that she had nothing to pay and in fact would be getting 2.5 gulden out of it because there was a gold filling in the tooth she had pulled out . To procure identity documents during this period in hiding they first had to be stolen and edited to suit the Jewish people to whom they were given . Ration cards also had to be stolen from the offices . In 1942 these operations were all only half organised whereas later the resistance movement was large enough for them to be managed in a properly planned fashion . In March – April 1945 the Germans allowed just once the Swedish Red Cross to drop bread and margarine from planes for the populace . A Hungarian Jew by the name of Pollak tried to organise a warning service . People warned each other in good time so that they could hide from the German raids . He also helped to find hiding places for Jews and sheltered his own friend Geza Weiss in a Swiss man home who kept him in his hideout . After some time Pollak was arrested by the Germans . On condition that 4 he carry out undercover operations and betray Jews for them he was released . Sadly he kept his promise and took his task of betraying Jews very seriously . He even exposed his own friend Geza Weiss . Weiss died in Auschwitz/CAMP and the Swiss Dr Rimatha was murdered in Buchenwald/CAMP . Pollak himself was killed in the street by a man from the underground during the occupation period . 4th May was the day of liberation . People could be heard in the evening calling out the good news in the street but no one dared leave their hiding places until they were sure that the curfew was still being ignored and everyone could run through the streets happy and free without coming to any harm . On 5th May the liberated people of  Amsterdam/GPE descended on the Royal Palace where people always congregate on happy occasions . The Germans were still occupying a building in the area and despite the war being over they again shot at the crowd of people from their windows . Out of the Jewish people once living in Holland/GPE survived . 
her husband deportation to Lublin/CAMP the authoress fled with her eleven year old son from Wrutky/GPE in Slovakia/GPE to Hungary/GPE at Galanta/GPE the man she had bribed to take them to Budapest/GPE took them to the Police instead . She had the choice to go into an Hungarian camp but preferred to be sent back . When they arrived in Slovakia/GPE they were immediately taken to the Camp at Szered/CAMP from where a selection of one thousand Jews were sent eastward every week . Being a good cook and working day and night the authoress could stay on for 1 ½ years p.2 . In autumn 1943 the Germans took over from the Hlinka guards p.2 3 and terror began . In November the authoress was sent to Auschwitz/CAMP where she lost her mother at the arrival her son soon afterwards . During the humiliating and exciting mistranslation by original indexer agitating procedures the women had to go through many of them went into hysterics some neighbours asked the authoress to sing to the women so that they should not go mad all of them and she sang the melody of Ave Maria but without the words as she did not know them . The song did not only calm the upset detainees but pleased an SS woman so much that she let the singer come to her warm room where she enjoyed listening to many more songs then she sent her to join another bunch of internees so probably saving her life as she never saw her former companions again . Horrible conditions . A phantastic painting in fresco p.5 . In February or March 1944 the women were asked if they wanted to be sent to this or that labour camp in Germany/GPE the author chose Lippstadt/CAMP the transport comprehended about 300 women from Czechoslovakia/LOC 400 from Hungary/GPE 45 from Poland/GPE and some others it took a week and many died on the way p.6 . Work in factory of and metalware . Ill treatment . The camp was evacuated in spring 1945 . Completely exhausted and panicking again and again the women were driven in the direction of Buchenwald/CAMP . On Easter Sunday after a march of three days and nights they suddenly found themselves abandoned by their tormentors and spotted the approaching Americans who immediately gave chase to the fleeing SS detachment and succeeded in seizing them . Ave Maria at Auschwitz/CAMP At the beginning of 1942 I was living in the small Slovakian town of Wrutky/GPE Rutka/GPE in Hungarian near the railway junction of Zilina German Sillein Hungarian Zsolna with my first husband and our son who was then eleven years old My husband was a timber merchant . The Nazis deported him to Lublin/CAMP in March 1942 . To escape the same fate I decided to flee with my little boy across the nearby border to Hungary/GPE where conditions for Jews were supposed to be better . I sold everything I could for cash and then approached a railway official to see if he could smuggle us over the border for a large sum of money . At that time many Hungarian troops were being sent to the Russian front through Slovakia/GPE and the railway carriages were coming back empty . My son and I were hidden in one of these empty carriages and then taken over the border to Galanta/LOC where a second man who had also been bribed was supposed to collect us and take us to Budapest/GPE . But the second railway worker who was involved in the escape did not take us to the agreed destination but straightaway turned us over to the Hungarian police who gave him 30 pengoe as a fee for betrayal . In Galanta/LOC we were kept locked up in prison for three days by the Hungarian police . They especially tried to get information out of my son using physical violence to find out which route we had taken to get there . But they could not get anything out of him . He came back to me with his face full of blood and said proudly Mama I did tell them anything . Finally the police commanding officer asked me if I wanted to stay in Hungary/GPE in which case the two of us would be taken to an internment camp or whether I would prefer to be sent back to Slovakia/GPE . He left the choice between these two options up to me . Helpless and at a loss to know what to do I chose to go back to Slovakia/GPE but once I had arrived there we were interned again and this time in the infamous assembly camp in Szered/CAMP . At that time this camp was run by the Hlinka Guard . The camp was permanently occupied by several thousand Jews men women and children . New inhabitants arrived daily taken here from all parts of Slovakia/GPE . About once a week there was a selection that is to say that about 1000 of the inmates were selected to be put into railway carriages and transported to the East/LOC . Mostly it was not clear what the criteria for the selection were the interned inmates were assembled randomly and those destined for deportation were herded together into a particular barrack room which they were not allowed to leave until they were loaded onto the railway wagons . They were not even allowed out to go to the lavatory . The camp consisted of old military barrack buildings which had not been properly converted so that the inhabitants were exposed to the inclemency of the weather . The food rations were meagre and always the mostly potatoes and beans . There in the camp I was also reunited with my mother who had been brought to Szered/CAMP with a number of other Jewish women . The food for the interned prisoners was prepared in a central kitchen and apart from that there was a special kitchen for the Hlinka Guard . One day I was sitting in the kitchen with about 50 other women peeling potatoes when suddenly a Hlinka Guard came in to find two women to help in his own personal kitchen . A number of women volunteered including me . The guard led me to the other kitchen and showed me a large piece of meat that was completely burnt and charred and he asked me what I could make out it . Using thickeners flour and so on I made a kind of sour sauce as well as some dumplings and so made an edible meal out of it . He liked it so much that he ordered me to report to the Guards kitchen every day at 7 in the morning from then on . The fact that I had this regular job temporarily saved me and my relatives from being deported . Every day I cooked for 60 guards washed up and tidied the kitchen . I worked hard day and night and so for eighteen months I managed to spare us being deported . But in the autumn of 1943 things got much worse . The Hlinka Guards were replace by Germans and with this came a new wave of terror . The whole camp lived in increasing fear and despair . New people arrived every day even those Slovakian and Hungarian Jews who still had had work permits to live in Slovakian towns were now sent to the camp . There were horrific scenes in the camp itself . Day and night the Germans would herd the interned prisoners in and out of the barracks and would shoot into the crowd with revolvers and guns . Many people were killed in this way . The Rabbi from Nyitra/LOC was shot in a shed just next to the kitchen . There were more and more selections and deportations . In November 1943 my mother my son and I were selected and sent to Auschwitz/CAMP . We arrived in Auschwitz/CAMP after a terrible journey in an overcrowded carriage . When we arrived we were still together as a family . We owned two small cases with some clothes and underwear I carried one and my son carried the other . But he was exhausted . His little hands were bloody and blistered . I told him it would be better if he threw the suitcase away . And that what he did . It did make any difference anyway because they took everything away from us in Auschwitz/CAMP even the clothes that we were wearing . After we had arrived in Auschwitz/CAMP we were taken to the infamous camp doctor Mengele who then made his selection . Admittedly we did not know what it meant when he sent the old and weak to one side and the others to the other side . He asked me how old I was . I was confused and as I was used to speaking Hungarian in which in numbers the digits are said in the opposite way to German I made a mistake and instead of giving my age as 37 I said I was 73 . He looked at me puzzled and sent me to the side where my mother was . At that very moment I realised that I had said something wrong and I corrected myself out loud . He grabbed my arm angrily and pulled me over to the other side . I did know what it was all about and only realised much later . I never saw my mother again . I was with my son for a little while longer after that but then I also lost him . When we were taken to be tattooed I saw the SS soldiers leading him away with the other children I ran up to the gate after him but was held back by the sentry . I could still see my son turn around and wave to me . That was the last time I saw him . We women were then moved from one set of barracks to another . All our clothes and personal possessions were taken away from us we were tattooed our hair was cut off we driven around from place to place naked . Our body hair was shaved off supposedly to stop the spread of lice and all this in full view of the SS soldiers . Finally we were taken to a huge hall into which hundreds of women had been herded not just from our transportation but I also saw many other foreign women there All the women were in a state of total exhaustion and at the end of their tether . Some stood around apathetically some shouted or laughed hysterically many bickered and there were scuffles there were also some who sang . A neighbour who had accompanied me on the journey from Szered/CAMP and who knew that I loved music and had a good voice told me that I should sing something so that we did all go mad . Of course I did feel at all like singing but as time went on and as we had been standing there waiting for hours I began to sing the Ave Maria . I did know the words and sang only the melody . As I sang it grew quiet in the hall the screaming was silenced the women squabbling stopped berating each other . When I had finished one of the female SS overseers came in and asked Who was the singer ? I thought my time was up . But she led me out and into her own room where it was warm and where I was allowed to sit down . She ordered me to sing some songs and I sang a number of German and Hungarian songs . Finally she had had enough and took me back to the women but to quite another barracks . As a consequence of this incident I was separated from my former colleagues in fate and I met another group of people all strangers . I never saw the women and girls who had come with me from Szered/CAMP again and probably this incident had saved my life . Then we were given clothes that were just bits of rag . I was given a dress which must have previously belonged to a very fat woman as it hung off my body . One sleeve had a huge hole . Seemingly a rat had gnawed in it and you could see my naked flesh through the gap . It was a thin summer dress and I wore it throughout the harsh cold Auschwitz/CAMP winter . We did get any stockings at all . For my feet I got a pair of Dutch clogs which rubbed so badly that after only a short time my feet were bleeding . Given this situation I thought it preferable to throw the useless clogs away and decided I would prefer to go barefoot . In the bitterly cold winter that followed I walked barefoot in the snow and ice . We suffered terribly on the parade ground where we had to stand every morning sometimes for five or six hours . Sometimes to warm up our hands we used to put them in the armpits of the women prisoners standing in front of us or next to us . Once when we were standing like this a woman beside me collapsed completely exhausted . Another woman and I dragged her to one side and shortly afterwards she died right there in front of us . When we returned to the group and tried to stand in line as we had been ordered to we discovered that a selection had just taken place and I had now been placed in another barrack building . And so I had once again by a miracle cheated death . In the course of time I was allocated to five or six different barrack maybe even more . Any concept I had of time or space ceased to exist . We simply eked out an existence there and I can only remember fragments . I do remember that in the beginning of my miserable time in Auschwitz/CAMP I was in the so called Roma Gypsy barracks . I also remember that once when we were sent to fill up the straw sacks we went through a room where someone had drawn a fantastical fresco . It was of some kind of coal mine in which some miners were working . In the foreground there was a car and a German officer was getting out of it and he was being greeted by a soldier doing the Hitler salute . Apparently a painter who was imprisoned there had painted this . In the barracks we women slept in so called kojen bunks six eight or even more women packed tightly together like sardines . You could move . If one person wanted to move then the whole row had to get up to complete the manoeuvre . During the night no one was allowed to leave the barracks not even to answer the call of nature . The worst of this was that most of us suffered from diarrhoea and cystitis probably as a result of the terrible diet that mostly consisted of turnip soup or an indistinguishable porridge . Once in the middle of the night I tried to take an overflowing latrine bucket outside and I got beaten for that with a broom . We got beaten for anything at all by both the overseers and the SS personnel . I spent the long winter months in this hell . In February or March 1944 there were several work transportations of men and women to Germany/GPE . In the crowded barracks where we women a group of all different they called out where the transports were going and they asked us if any of us wanted to go there . Many volunteered because they thought that anywhere had to be better than this hellish place Auschwitz/CAMP . One day we were asked Who wants to go to Belsen/CAMP ? I did like the sound of this name it reminded me somehow of Beelzebub/LOC and I did volunteer . Then they asked Who wants to go to Ravensbrück/CAMP ? and after that Who wants to go to Lippstadt/CAMP ? I liked the sound of the name Ravensbrück/CAMP and I was about to volunteer when a woman standing next to me said Do go to Ravensbrück/CAMP . It really bad there . Come to Lippstadt/CAMP with me instead . Once again chance had sealed my fate . I volunteered to go to Lippstadt/CAMP . The transport consisted only of women . As far as I remember there were 300 Czechoslovakians 400 Hungarians 45 Poles as well as a few Dutch French and Belgian women . Before the transport left we were given clothes . I got a coat a pair of stockings and a pair of shoes . Of course none of it fitted anymore . The shoes were far too big and wide for me but as time went on as a consequence of the strain and suffering I endured my feet became so swollen that the new shoes became too small again . At the end I got another pair of wooden clogs . Although we believed that there could not be any worse suffering than that which we had endured in Auschwitz/CAMP we were soon to experience new forms of anguish in the carriages on the journey from Auschwitz/CAMP to Lippstadt/CAMP . 70 women were herded into each truck . Originally they told us that the journey would last three days but in reality we travelled for a week . We did get anything to eat or drink the whole time . We wailed and pleaded in vain . Finally one German soldier took pity on us and gave us some of his own food but only a few women had some and then only a mouthful . A large number of women died during the journey and their corpses accompanied the living to Lippstadt/CAMP . When we arrived there the women who survived were starved to the bone and so weak that they could not climb out of the trucks . Lippstadt/LOC is a small industrial town in Westphalia/LOC and we were to work there in the Lippstadter and metal works factory . However our camp was outside the town and every morning we had to march from the camp to the factory . SS soldiers escorted us and they herded us with whips as if we were cattle . We had to march in rows of five across and naturally the people on the end of the row felt the whip more often than those in the middle . So of course everyone wanted to go in the middle as far away as possible from the SS soldiers who accompanied us on both sides . Finally we all agreed that we would alternate where we stood in the rows one day on the edge of the row and one day in the middle and so on . In spite of this every day we were beaten black and blue . There were other instances of mistreatment and torture . We would be punished for the slightest insubordination or alleged infringement . One day because of some apparently small crime we had to lie flat in the snow and stay there for hours on end . The SS went backward and forwards between the rows and if any of us dared to lift our heads or just move a little we got a kick from a heavy boot . I myself got a kick in the back and suffered an injury to my spine which I still have today and which has caused me constant pain . The food rations were very poor . Early in the morning there was an indistinguishable black drink and we never knew whether it was coffee or tea . For lunch we had mostly soup and turnips . Now and then we had some horsemeat . The food was not designed to help us regain our strength but nevertheless we had to do the heavy work in the factory . All kinds of machine parts were manufactured there and it was said also components for the V1 and V2s . Large numbers of forced labourers worked there not just we women from the concentration camp but also French and Italian workers Russian prisoners of war and other nationalities too . We had to carry heavy pieces of iron and work at the stamping machine and solder too . The overseers exhorted us to work harder . If we did work fast enough or when something went wrong the Germans threatened us and shouted at us You saboteurs ! We have you shot . This forced labour lasted more than a year . In the spring of 1945 there were increasing signs that we were soon to be liberated . The camp was cleared . Shortly before Easter we women were herded together and we were supposed to be transported to Buchenwald/CAMP . This time we were not to travel there in trucks but we were to walk there . Once again we were assembled in rows of five and we were escorted on the march by heavily armed soldiers . We walked for three long days and also for a large part of the night . One night we were driven into a barn filled with straw . Many feared that they would kill us all before we could be liberated and suddenly a rumour went around that the Germans intended to set the barn alight and burn us all to death . No one dared to go to sleep everyone wanted to be close to the door in order to be able to escape from danger . But this night passed . The next day we were made to continue . We were all nearly dead from exhaustion . And then after all that it began to rain . We covered our heads with our mess tins . Finally we arrived at a hill where we were told to stop . The German soldiers stood in the road and had set up their machine guns . Again there was great panic . Suddenly we heard the noise of aeroplanes and just above our heads an aerial battle began . We all threw ourselves onto the ground . When we looked up after some time all the Germans had disappeared . We women stood alone on the hill completely at a loss as to what to do . Suddenly a woman shouted The American tanks are coming . We were overcome with joy . At first the Americans did not know what to make of this large group of people and aimed their canons at us but that did last long . As I understood English I was singled out as the group interpreter and I explained the situation to the Americans . They were friendly and told us which way we needed to go as they had to keep on advancing so that they could capture the fleeing German and as we later found they managed to do this So we were liberated on that Easter Sunday . Elizabeth Lichtenstein/LOC . 
personal report on a journey to Berlin/GPE in 1949 the extreme destruction the differences and difficulties caused through the division into East/LOC and/LOC West/LOC Berlin/GPE p.4 second part of the report is mostly concerned with the situation of the Jews in Berlin/GPE . There were in 1949 in 1925 holding a professional job p.10 . The report details various administration centres in Berlin/GPE one common centre for the Jewish Community of all districts p.11 12 . New Jewish Hospital p.9 14 15 which now has many non Jewish patients as it is too large for the requirements . The synagogues are also too large same in Hamburg p.9 12 13 15 19 . Preaching against the black market stopped p.6 13 . The Jews in Berlin/GPE are aware of the danger connected with their stay in Germany/GPE they all agree that there is no future there for their children p.10 . 9 . Further References Field marshal Keitel his niece mixed marriage p.2 3 . The blockade p.3 4 . Niederschönhausen/LOC p.6 15 . Wilhelm Pieck Ministerpräsident Grotewohl Arnold Zweig p.6 7 . Freie und Humboldt Universität p.8 . Stachanow/LOC p.8 Sigmund Weltlinger President of the Jewish Community p.11 14 15 19 . Dr. Rosenberg Chief Doctor of the Jewish Hospital . Prof. Dr. Hans Joachim Schöps Erlangen University p.13 14 . Rabbi Steven Schwarzschild p.13 . Lack of rabbis they do not stay long there p.14 . Care for children for old people p.15 17 Mischlinge cemetery at Weißensee/LOC p.17 . Restitution claims p.18 19 . JRU Jewish Relief Unit p.19 . Berlin/GPE 1949 The Russian zone stretches from central Germany/GPE to the Russian and Polish frontiers in the east and contains the cities of Erfurt/LOC Magdeburg/LOC and . In this large region which covers almost half of Germany/GPE there is Berlin/GPE but its situation is different it is not subject to the Russian regime but to all four occupying forces . Going to the city by plane is no problem and no special permission is needed from anyone . It is more difficult to go by train as it runs through the Russian zone for about 170 kilometres or more . I was not bothered by these limitations my journey was ‘ sponsored by the Foreign Office and I travelled in the train of the CCG Control Commission Germany/GPE . From Hamburg/GPE we went first to Hannover/GPE . This is a long detour but the train runs from the west and not from Hamburg/GPE . From Hannover/GPE I travelled in the sleeping car . Obviously the trains of the CCG run through the Russian zone only at night . There is a notice saying that the windows must be closed and the curtains drawn . So you do see anything of the area not even a night time view . At one station the train stopped for over an hour . This was in Helmstedt/LOC a place often mentioned during the time of the Berlin/GPE blockade the place where the airlift had started . I arrived at the Zoologischer Garten Zoo station on the morning of 24 October . The first thing I heard when I stepped onto the street was one man asking another ‘ Hast du Alexen I was back home . The destruction of Berlin/GPE is terrible really beyond description worse than in any other town I have seen during this journey . No part has been spared every one has suffered . The Reichstag Parliament is burnt out large parts of the walls are destroyed . The same is TRUE of the Fasanenstrasse/STREET synagogue . Both buildings had been burnt down by the Germans long before the war and are now monuments which bear witness to the fact that it was the Germans and not the enemy who started the destruction . If the two buildings had still been standing perhaps Berlin/GPE Germany/GPE and the world would have been spared all the other destruction . The Germans complaints about what happened to them and what the war had done to them are put into perspective by these two buildings . It is very difficult to point to certain parts of Berlin/GPE as more heavily destroyed than the rest because everywhere there is terrible destruction . The is a wasteland partly overgrown by weeds there are still some trees left and some parts have been made into allotments . The Siegesallee conveys a tragicomic impression . Large parts of the once splendid Unter den Linden have been destroyed and knocked down . The Unter den Linden / Friedrichstrasse/STREET intersection once a focus of traffic unparalleled in the world now looks like a track across fields but without any fields . The houses in both streets are completely demolished and so nothing on one side faces nothing on the other . In the Wilhelmstrasse/STREET the has disappeared . The last fighting took place here and afterwards the Russians cleared away the whole huge building . Today it is waste ground with one lonely stump sticking up into the air a remnant of Hitler huge bunker where he committed suicide . All over the city you are reminded of the splendour which once existed now gone . In front of the sad remains of a house you learn that Rudolf Mosse had lived there and in front of the even bigger ruins of the neighbouring house that Aloys Petschek had lived there . Behind these remains some ruins protrude and you are informed that lived there . His niece had married a Jew . I was told that she had insisted on bringing up her children as Jews during the Third Reich and her husband is now the Parnos Head of Community of the Jewish Community in Frankfurt/GPE am Main . On the Alexanderplatz I tried to find the house in which my parents had lived for years 49 Alexanderstrasse/STREET . It has disappeared and all the houses in the neighbourhood with it the large square is an empty desert . Not only is the destruction in Berlin/GPE more widespread it is also more thorough . The other towns I visited were only attacked by enemy bombers but in Berlin/GPE there was also close combat with tanks and artillery . The rubble has been cleared away in many places but in others the ruins remain and are a danger to traffic . There are still ruins waiting to be blown up . Then the police block off a wide area passers by have to wait around the next corner then there is an explosion followed by the loud thunder of the collapsing building a cloud of dust rises high into the sky and a group of workers appear to clear away the rubble . Reconstruction in Berlin/GPE is much slower than in other places . The Berliners tell stories of the Blockade which lasted almost a year during which time they were lacking the bare necessities of life . Only then and there do you fully understand the importance of the air lift the ‘ air bridge as it is called in Berlin/GPE . The Allies used three airfields when supplying the city by air . I visited the southernmost one Tempelhof the Americans airfield . Its vast area is filled with hangars hangar after hangar . During the blockade a plane arrived every three minutes . It touched down the pilot was able to have a rest and something to eat in the nearby barracks while the plane was unloaded and made ready to take off again . Within a very short time it was flying west again to bring the next delivery to Berlin/GPE . The same thing happened at the British airfield in Gatow/GPE near Potsdam/GPE and at the northern airfield – I think it was Tegel/LOC . That when you come to understand what ‘ Cold War means and how great the victory was that the English and Americans won over the Russians though suffering heavy losses . And yet whatever was achieved Berlin/GPE could only be provided with the barest necessities . This lack of everything has lasted and is one reason why rebuilding Berlin/GPE takes so very long . There are also other factors which produce the same effect the division of Germany/GPE into zones the blockade between East/LOC and West/LOC which cuts Berlin/GPE off from West Germany/GPE without which the city can not survive and the fact that Berlin/GPE itself is chopped into sectors . There are four . They are from south to north the American the British and the French sectors . In the east all three border on the Russian sector . You must not confuse them with the zones they have nothing whatsoever to do with them . It is difficult to get into the Russian zone and perhaps even more difficult to leave it again but you can enter the Russian sector and leave it again without any . It is very different in the zones . On 12 October I went to a conference in Harzburg/LOC . Not far to the east of there is the Russian zone . Our driver took me and some colleagues along beautiful roads past hills and forests to show us the . It is now in the Soviet zone . The frontier is indicated by yellow stripes on the trees and across the road . But the driver may miss the signs and enter Russian territory without realising – that makes him nervous and he turns back ten kilometres from the frontier . That can not happen to you in Berlin/GPE . The boundaries between the sectors are clearly marked Vous entrez le secteur français – You are leaving the British you are entering the American sector . At the entrance to the Russian sector there are the corresponding inscriptions in Russian lettering . This division has far reaching consequences . The city is split into two halves which are separate from each other – not so much geographically but in other decisive respects . There are two local authorities now instead of one . The town hall in the Königsstrasse is in the Russian sector . It is the seat of one local authority under Fritz Ebert the son of the former . Somewhere in the west is the local government of West/LOC Berlin/GPE under Lord Mayor Professor Reuter . Only a few institutions belong to the city as a whole . Among them is the Jewish Community which is based in Oranienburger Strasse in the Russian sector . There are big differences between the sectors . In the West the shops are well stocked in the East there is hardly anything . In the West there is an abundance of fruit in the shops and on the streets in the Russian sector there is no fruit at all . TRUE in the Russian sector there is Werder/LOC a small place the ‘ orchard of Berlin/GPE but the Russians have bought up all the fruit to make jam which they send to Russia/GPE . The two zones have different economic systems . In the Russian sector there is the collective with numerous co operative shops as well as the ‘ Handelsorganisation HO . This is a state owned nationalised trading association . Their shops are better stocked than the private ones the prices higher . You soon learn from little things what it means to have this single city divided into several sectors with different economic systems . I wandered around from the ‘ Zoo station to ‘ Under den Linden . When I had had enough I asked at the Friedrichstrasse/STREET station for a ticket to ‘ Zoo station and wanted to pay twenty pfennigs . But I did not get a ticket . ‘ Only Ostmarks the ticket office clerk said . So there are two currencies in Berlin/GPE Ostmarks in the Russian sector and Westmarks in the British sector . Despite all the money I had with me I could not buy anything . I walked to the ‘ Potsdamer Platz station but it was the same there – that station is also in the Russian sector . But a few steps further on there is the ‘ Potsdamer Platz underground station in the British sector and I got my ticket there . In both sectors the currencies are relatively stable but one Westmark is worth six Ostmarks and is a very elite currency by comparison . A customer from the British sector can buy goods very cheaply in the Russian sector and indeed many people from the West shop there in the same way as foreigners went shopping in Germany/GPE during the period of inflation 1922 1923 . They buy Ostmarks with their Westmarks in the West . There is an extensive market in the streets where all sorts of goods are on offer American cigarettes English or Italian coffee dollars pounds and also Ostmarks and Westmarks . People buying Ostmarks will perhaps get only 5.5 Ostmarks for one Westmark and on the other hand will perhaps pay 6.5 Ostmarks for one Westmark . These differences in exchange rates are the basis of this trade . Here the visitor is confronted for the first time with the ‘ black market in practice based on small sums but he will soon be faced with bigger problems . The difference between the currencies produces immense difficulties in many areas of life and is bringing about the radical separation of the Western from the Eastern sectors . There is no geographical frontier there are no guards to prevent people from entering the various sectors . The powers are invisible which prevent contacts and circulation between them . A few days before I came to Berlin/GPE the East German government had started operations . I was in Niederschönhausen/LOC . There is a castle there where once a Prince of resided . Now this large area has been confiscated and cut off from the rest of the world by a massive wooden fence . Behind this barrier lives the President of the East German Republic GDR Wilhelm Pieck and some others of the hierarchy of the new state . Among them is Arnold Zweig . His wife was one of my pupils in the VII Religious School of the Jewish Community almost fifty years ago I accepted an invitation from her and thus was able for a short time to see the area behind the wooden fence . Zweig lives in the manor house which the government has granted to him . Once it had belonged to somebody else who is perhaps now wandering about as a DP displaced person without a home to go to . It is splendidly equipped with furniture belonging to the state . ‘ It belongs to the state means it has been confiscated and stolen from its owner . Communism just like National Socialism and other revolutionary movements has its fellow travellers . But Zweig is proud that his books have earned him some furniture for his private use . He was in Israel/GPE in Haifa/LOC but a German writer an artist of the German language can not earn a living there . For him and others of his circle Communism is their religion . He speaks about dialectical materialism like an orthodox Jew about the Torah of Moses . He was about to travel to Warsaw/GPE as the representative of the ‘ All German Democratic Government for Unity and Peace to attend the celebrations for the two hundredth anniversary of Goethe birth . The government he represented had been installed just a fortnight before . Joseph Stalin letter of congratulations to President Wilhelm Pieck had been posted on many walls in the Russian sector and the inaugural speech of Prime Minister Grotewohl was displayed on the advertising columns . He had spoken like all the heads of government everywhere in every country no matter which system they represent . ‘ The most important means to achieve our aims is to improve productivity . The seat of this government is the former Ministry of Propaganda in the Wilhelmstrasse/STREET opposite the former Reichskanzlei . This was previously where Goebbels got up to his mischief . The former Reichskanzlei is flanked to the south by the former Ministry of Aviation Göring creation once described as ‘ megalomania in stone and to the north by Goebbels former Ministry the whole symbolising the crazy arrogance and complete collapse of the National Socialist state . The evidence of the defeat is even more impressive elsewhere in the Russian sector than in the three others . One symbol directly at the entrance is the Brandenburg Gate . It still exists but the four horsed chariot Quadriga is seriously damaged by gunfire only one of the four horses remains and three of its feet were shot away with only one still sticking up into the air . has disappeared in its place has been hoisted a large red flag . Like other monuments of Prussian grandeur the Neue Wache is burnt out and deserted . Across the gate there is a long banner on which is written ‘ Let there be peace ! The arsenal with the Hall of Fame is burnt out and partly destroyed . The trophies which were kept there have disappeared . A notice states that this building is to become a ‘ House of Soviet Culture . Russian propaganda is insistent and effective . The University is also partly burnt out and partly destroyed . Those rooms which can still be used have been turned to a large extent into co operative shops in some lecture halls however there are still lectures . The name of the University is no longer ‘ Königliche Universität Royal University as it was called fifty years ago when I was a student there it is now ‘ Humboldt Universität . Somewhere in the West a ‘ Freie Universität Free University has been founded which claims to be the genuine one . That is why there are large posters calling upon the students to defend the unity of their University just as their ancestors had done in 1848 the year of the German Revolution against that institution in the West which is splitting the University . In the building the propaganda for the Stakhanovite system is conspicuous . This is a new way of organising work . In the English press it is called a kind of modern slavery and the way in which the Soviets have brought back slavery in Europe/LOC . The posters in the University present a very different idea . Pictures and texts show how the miner Stakhanov had one day beaten the record of some face worker because of the special way he had gone about his work how he had consequently been entrusted with organising the work and how he had increased the productivity of mining and of the whole economy in Russia/GPE with it in a way unheard of before . They say his system will free the working masses from excessive work and will give them liberty at last . May workers and employers decide who is right . In any case it is surprising to see how the same management system is praised by one group as the way to paradise whereas others condemn it as the way to hell . I have not seen a lot of Russian military personnel in Berlin/GPE . As in the other sectors and in West/GPE Germany/GPE the occupation in the Russian sector is ‘ invisible . Only the police among them a considerable number of females seem from their outward appearance and uniforms to be Russian . But they only look like Russians in reality they are Germans . There is greater poverty in Berlin/GPE than anywhere else . When you stop in the street you will be asked by well dressed men both young and old if you perhaps need a guide . I have received petitions and begging letters from persons unknown to me and I was told that people keep sending them in large quantities hoping to get some money from time to time . The defeat is also demonstrated in the names of streets . The former ‘ Kronprinzenallee Crown Prince/STREET Avenue/STREET in Grünewald/LOC is now called Clay by West/LOC Berlin/GPE in grateful recognition of General Clay support . In the Russian sector one of the most beautiful streets is now called . Another street in the Tiergarten is now named Reichpietsch Ufer Reichpietsch Bank to commemorate the sailor Ernst Reichpietsch one of the leaders of the German navy rebellion in 1917 who was then shot . What will these streets be called in fifty or one hundred years I wonder . II Nowadays Jews live in Berlin/GPE . That is not many compared with the in 1925 . But Berlin/GPE is still by far the biggest Jewish Community in Germany/GPE a fact which is very important . In Berlin/GPE single Jews are not condemned to live an extremely lonely life in contrast to those in other places . Although the Jews live in very different districts all over the city they can meet those that they get on with . I was invited by Dr Rosenberg the senior consultant of the Jewish hospital . There were other guests there too . It was a pleasant evening with most interesting conversations which could have taken place anywhere . To that extent life for a German Jew is easier and less dreary than in other places . I was received by the Community leaders and learnt a lot . The gentlemen there are convinced that the number of Jews in their Community is fairly constant and will remain so or at least will not change greatly within the foreseeable future . They believe that on the whole migration has stopped most of those who now live here have a special relationship with Berlin/GPE many were born in Berlin/GPE . They will stay unless particular circumstances force them to emigrate . As everywhere else it is mostly the elderly who explain that they want to stay here where their jobs and pension are rather than live abroad as beggars . They certainly sense the impending danger in Germany/GPE and particularly in Berlin/GPE but they are resigned and say quite rightly that it is dangerous for them everywhere and that there is no security anywhere . But it is TRUE looking at the Community administration board you can see that there is a strong desire to emigrate . There are different members now from four years ago at the end of the war . The then Chairman Kammergerichtsrat Supreme Court Judge Dr Fabian has emigrated with his family to the USA/GPE probably because of his children . For it is generally agreed that the children must not stay in Germany/GPE but must be prepared for emigration to either Israel/GPE or elsewhere . Nobody thinks about life after the next two generations but they believe there will be a future within this time span . It seems that in Berlin/GPE comparatively more Jews are in employment than anywhere else . A register of the members of the Community drawn up according to their jobs was read out to me in the Community office but so quickly that I could not catch everything . The list comprises names of people who are in work . If I am not mistaken there are only four Jewish commercial travellers left . What is striking in Berlin/GPE as everywhere is the small number of doctors because they can work almost anywhere and so do not need to come back unlike those of other professions . The number of jurists however is relatively large as it is everywhere . In Berlin/GPE there are fifty one ‘ juristische Personen jurists as they are called in the register . The list begins Kammergerichtspräsident President of the Supreme Court 1 Senatspräsident President of the Senate 1 . In fact there are two supreme courts now one for the western sector and one for the Russian sector . The President of the eastern Supreme Court Dr Freund is a very active member of the Community . There are twenty seven lawyers . Whereas in other places there are few Jewish shops or none at all the Community administration board in Berlin/GPE has set up shops for a number of members who thus earn enough to live on although the legislative body and the administration try to replace the private shops with expropriated shops or those run by the co operative or the ‘ Handelsorganisation and they try to make life pretty difficult for the private shop owners by not delivering enough goods and in other ways . As already mentioned the Jews in all four sectors form a single Community and they are proud of it . The occupying powers have introduced their special system of administration almost everywhere . Thus in the British sector the English have replaced the function of the Lord Mayor by appointing a British Mayor . Here the city is represented by a citizen who is elected for one year and has the title ‘ Lord Mayor . But the head of the administration is a civil servant elected for twelve years whose title is ‘ Oberstadtdirektor and who is in charge of the administration . The Russians have established something similar for the ecclesiastical administration a board with a central office which belongs to the municipal authorities and which consists of representatives of all the denominations and also of similar groups such as the Unions of Spiritualists or of Anthroposophists . The representative of the Jewish Community Sigmund Weltlinger is so pleased with his role and prides himself on the fact that the meetings of this body are the only occasion when the mayors of the two municipal authorities which govern Berlin/GPE meet and shake hands . But it is not definite that this arrangement will last and this gives cause for concern . It is the Communists in the Community who demand the partition of the one Community into two one for the Russian sector and one for the three Western sectors . The seat of the administration is in the Russian sector whereas the majority of the members live in the Western sectors . One synagogue – in Pestalozzistrasse/STREET – has not been damaged at all . Others were damaged and have been repaired while most of the synagogues were destroyed . New prayer rooms have been arranged for small groups one in Joachimsthaler Strasse and one in the office building of the Community . The synagogues are too big for the few people who wish to worship . On Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur there are services in the Rykestrasse/STREET synagogue and on these occasions the synagogue is fairly full . But the services on Pesach and Sukkot are not attended at all . Daily services as well as those on the Sabbath are held in a prayer room containing about eighty seats . I gave a lecture there and the room was quite full . In the Pestalozzistrasse/STREET synagogue I gave another lecture . There may have been about the same number of people as in the Rykestrasse/STREET but in that huge room they were lost a depressing sight and a painful reminder of the fact that the clothes have become too big for the Jews of . The same is TRUE of other Communities . In Hamburg/GPE services are held in the small but beautiful synagogue of the Oppenheim Old People Home . They were always quite well attended . The Community still owns the big temple but there are not enough members to fill it and so they have let it to the Nordwestdeutscher . In the big auditorium there I gave a lecture on the situation in Israel/GPE the room was full of music stands and instruments . Here too the clothes have become too big for the shrunken body . In the Pestalozzistrasse/STREET I heard a real chasan cantor again for the first time in Germany/GPE . His name is Nechama he is a Sephardic Jew from Salonika/LOC Thessaloniki/LOC spent a long time in a concentration camp KZ/CAMP afterwards came to Berlin/GPE and now all he wants is to emigrate to the USA/GPE because as he says his income in Berlin/GPE is too small . The way he led the prayers was most beautiful but his reading from the Torah left much to be desired . In Berlin/GPE as well as in Hamburg/GPE I also saw a few children two or three at the service . They get a special treat during the Kiddush blessing they walk up to the cantor and are allowed to drink what remains in the Kiddush cup . There are some teachers who give lessons only a few on the whole but at least the children get an idea of what Hebrew and Judaism mean . The Community has engaged one preacher Mr Riesenburger . He performs wedding ceremonies and funerals . About one year ago an American organisation appointed young Steven Schwarzschild as liberal rabbi in Berlin/GPE . He got married here and his wife obviously an excellent social worker manages the Berlin/GPE office of the Jewish Relief Unit . Schwarzschild belongs to the British or American administration and lives in the British sector in a house that the military government has requisitioned for British officers and civil servants . The furniture was provided by the occupying authorities . He the rabbi eats out with his wife and not kosher food . Apparently he is a good rabbi but he is faced with great difficulties . Not long before I came he had given a sermon against the black market whereupon some group – I do know which – had threatened to drag him out the pulpit next time . According to what I was told he had been intimidated by the threats and did not preach the next time . I was not able to get any further information . I spoke to him personally only once . On that occasion Hans Joachim Schoeps a professor of philosophy or theology – I am not quite sure which – in Erlangen/LOC was with him . Schoeps is a Jew and does not want to be anything else . It is a shame that my time in Berlin/GPE was so taken up and the whole stay was so short . I did not have a chance to look into many things which were important to me . Schwarzschild is going back to the USA/GPE in the spring . All the rabbis who so far have worked in West Germany/GPE Helfgott and Broch only stayed for a short time . Now the committee of the Community has again appointed Moritz Freier once the rabbi of the Jewish Community as the conservative and orthodox rabbi in Berlin/GPE . It will not be easy for him . The older generation still has some general knowledge about Judaism when I had finished my lecture – stories from the Talmud – in the prayer room in the Rykestrasse/STREET there was not only applause as usual but also one man from the audience stepped forward and said Rabbanan Kaddish . But a lot of aspects of Jewish life have disappeared almost completely . This is the case with Kashrut in particular . There is only one Jewish restaurant in the whole of Berlin/GPE in Schlachtensee/LOC . The food is good but expensive . One meal including a bottle of beer is twelve DM West German Marks . I asked them where their guests have their meals on Shabbos Sabbath the restaurant is so far away on the outskirts of the city that you can only get there by car . They explained to me that some guests stay overnight on Fridays and that those who can not do so are given packed lunches on Friday afternoon . On the whole Kashrut Kosher food is finished . The hospital of the Community which I will speak about later no longer observes the rules of Kosher life . Only a small percentage of the patients are still Jews . In Berlin/GPE just as everywhere else there is a lack of rabbis able to represent Judaism to the Community as well as to the outside world who are able to answer the many questions of Jews or who are the equals of the Christian theologians in the religious discussions which are now occurring . During a conversation with Sigmund Weltlinger I learnt what problems Jewish men are concerned with nowadays . He spent a long time in a KZ and studied the Bible thoroughly there . He now knows it very well . There is above all one disconcerting passage that he does not understand . In Samuel 1 2.25 it says of Eli sons ‘ Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father because the LORD would slay . This passage shocked and worried him and he was at a loss for an answer . Apart from their synagogues the Community also has its own institutions . The biggest is the Jewish hospital in Iranische Strasse . Dr Rosenberg is the Director . He lost his wife Eugen Fuchs daughter in a KZ and has married again a nurse . His son a junior doctor works with him and under him . He showed me the hospital . In his view it is even today excellently equipped and can carry out the many different modern methods of treatment . I saw the newly fitted out rooms of children ward which came into use for the first time on that very day nicely decorated with characters from German fairy tales . Everything looked very cheerful . But the hospital gives the same impression as the synagogues it also is too big for the Jewish population that has shrunk so much . As already mentioned only a small number of the patients are Jews and this is one of the reasons why it is not run according to Jewish precepts . Another problem is how to get doctors . As I have already explained there are only a few Jewish doctors in Germany/GPE and in particular in Berlin/GPE . They can get jobs in many countries and so they are not as keen as for example the lawyers on returning to Germany/GPE . The management is seriously considering employing Jewish doctors from abroad on short term contracts . Linked to the hospital are two homes a children home and an old people home . I did not have enough time to see them but I had the chance to visit the home for old people and children in Niederschönhausen/LOC in the Russian sector . I think in the children home there are eighteen children mostly from mixed . The education here is different from that in the English sector . From their earliest years the children learn to play chess . The Director Mr Baruch told me that there were some good players among them . He teaches Hebrew . On the walls there are Hebrew songs written in Roman not Hebrew letters . On the desk was a textbook of the Hebrew language – judging by the pictures it was aimed at little children . Some days before after my lecture in the Rykestrasse/STREET a woman had told me about her troubles . Her husband living in the Russian sector was taken from their flat by the Russians in April and has been missing ever since . Enquiries with the authorities produced no result . The highest authority – a general whose name I have forgotten – says he know nothing of the case . This case is direct evidence that people really do vanish into thin air in the Russian sector . In the children home I learnt exactly the same thing . In a twelve year old girl room there were two photographs on the bedside table one of her deceased mother the other one of her father and herself . But the father was taken from their flat some weeks ago he had been employed as a civil servant by the authorities in the Russian sector and has been missing ever since . Nobody knows anything about this and that is why the little girl has been taken to the home . Under the same roof or next to it is one of the two old people homes . The rooms are nicely furnished and cosy . I asked one woman whether she liked it there . She said she did . But someone who must know about it the Director or someone I think told me that this was not possible . None of them has a room to themselves and people who live very close together soon get on one another nerves . Moreover the economic situations of the inmates vary widely some are poorer than others some get parcels some do . This leads to envy and you ca stop it . This bad situation does not even change for the better when the lucky ones share some of their riches with the others . Yet I had a lovely fifteen minutes in the old people home . The oldest male Jew in Berlin/GPE lives there Mr Falkenstein a former glazier in Schlochau/LOC . He is ninety nine years old . He was just sitting there with his kippah yarmulke or skullcap on his head and when he took it off you could see the most beautiful white hair full and thick . Beside him lay his he is a pious man . He puts them on every day and has his breakfast only when he has completed this . It takes him a long time now until ten or half past ten . My companion told him that at his age he did not have to be so careful about this and said that I was an expert . But the old man did not accept this explaining that he was almost one hundred years old and did not want to change the habits of a lifetime . But he too has joyful moments . Every afternoon at three he puts the radio on and then he can hear the voice of his grandson who is an announcer . There is a radio in every room . As in other old people homes the residents here who are not Jews are the non Jewish spouses in mixed marriages . Twice I have visited the cemetery in Weissensee/LOC in the Russian sector . It is beautifully kept the fighting in Berlin/GPE has not destroyed its peace . In the office I asked about a grave that I wanted to see . It was found in no time with the help of a file . My parents graves are situated in a place of honour . On both sides – right and left – many people are buried whom I knew very well and who were close to me . Thus the visits to the cemetery were something of a spiritual reunion . On 30 October two days before I had to return home I attended a meeting of Jewish lawyers and other jurists . They had been summoned by the Community administration board . The Community is claiming the restitution of a large amount of land which they lost under Hitler through confiscation or in other ways . But apart from that there are more claims for restitution in Berlin/GPE than anywhere else . The Community has taken these on too . In order to pursue and deal with them they have just set up a compensation commission . Its Chairman is Mr Löwenthal who also spoke at the meeting . The Jewish lawyers however are not happy with these activities on the part of the Community . They say it is their job to deal with these claims and they feel restricted by the actions of the Community and also of other interested people and in particular the big Jewish organisations abroad . These have founded their own institutions two other institutions JRSO the Jewish Restitution Successor Organisation and a bank for restitution both with their headquarters in Frankfurt/GPE am Main are pursuing the same aims . Many are hoping to work for this restitution and thus earn some money . The lawyers are embittered in particular by an article by Dr Strauss a colleague who claimed in a New/LOC York/LOC newspaper that restitution should be enforced in Germany/GPE by foreign lawyers either from England/GPE or from the United/GPE States/GPE . He said the moral standards of German lawyers had fallen they did not keep their clients informed by carbon copy of any changes in their legal matters as had been common practice previously allegedly because of a lack of paper . He admitted however that the lawyers were intimidated the Germans as well as the Jews in short one should not engage any lawyer in Germany/GPE not even a Jewish one . The discussion produced some important insights . There are still fundamental questions open to discussion . The argument about whether Jews should be judges in these in these trials is still going on . In Berlin/GPE about sites are claimed for restitution . Between and persons are said to be entitled to claim . A number of claimants are baptised Jews . The Community acts for them too . Lawyers complain about the difficulties they have with legal processes . The administrators of the sites do not provide any information to enquirers . There are high costs and many of those entitled to claim can not pay them . One lawyer called the briefs he has been given a collection of briefs of the poor . Another argued that these cases are not exclusively a matter of civil law . ‘ The state has robbed us and the state has to make up for it . But that is not easy . Who is to make up for the losses ? One lawyer mentioned the fees for a certificate of inheritance . Another called it immoral that the state should demand a fee when they the state had murdered the person who left the inheritance . The meeting has given me a profound insight into the situation of the Russian as well as of the Western sectors . The underlying factors have become visible . On Shabbos Sabbath 29 October I took part in the service in the Pestalozzistrasse/STREET synagogue . The evening before I made a short speech on Neshamah Jethera the spirit of the Sabbath the other soul which usually sleeps and awakes on the Sabbath . The Sidrah weekly portion of the Torah was on the subject of Noah and so in my sermon I explained the idea of the Talmud that Noah had seen three worlds one flourishing one falling and one new born . Our generation understands even better than our ancestors the truth which is expressed in these words . On Friday evening I had been invited to a meal by Dr Rosenberg and his wife . Later some more guests arrived among them Sigmund Weltlinger and his wife . We had an extremely good conversation . On Monday I spent some time in the office the JRU Jewish Relief Unit . One man an electrical engineer was in absolute despair . He wanted to emigrate to Australia/GPE with his family but an entry permit was refused because he lived in East . Nobody knew what to do . These are the special problems of the people in the Russian zone . The next day Tuesday I returned home . Just as on my journey to Germany/GPE Mr Bruchheimer was travelling with me the most pleasant companion . I am sorry to say this was the last time I was to see him . Not long after our return he was knocked down by a car and died immediately . Between seven and eight we arrived in Vlissingen/LOC and at eight went on board . The sea was calm the night absolutely beautiful . Later there was fog which caused a delay . In the morning we arrived at Harwich/LOC . There was a big squadron of the British fleet in the harbour destroyers cruisers battleships a most impressive sight . The customs officers were very strict and it took a long time until the train was able to leave . But a few hours later we were at Liverpool/STREET Street/STREET station . Herbert was waiting for me . We had a shock because the customs officers in Harwich/LOC had stowed my luggage away so well that in London/GPE it could not be found straightaway . But soon we were able to relax and I was back in 18C Belsize Park grateful for an extraordinary journey which had taken me back for six weeks to my former profession and which brought me into contact with what was left of my former world in West Germany/GPE and in Berlin/GPE and also with a great deal of what has come back into being . 1 Translator note there was no common frontier between the Russian zone and Russia/GPE 2 ‘ Have you seen / met Alex ? – Alexen is dialect 3 Translator note the Reichstag was destroyed in an arson attack on 27 February 1933 a welcome pretext for Hitler and other leading Nazis to rid themselves of their political enemies eg communists socialists etc immediately and to annul almost all fundamental rights eg habeas corpus etc . The Reichstag building was repaired because Hitler obviously liked it and wanted to keep it although of course he hated the institution itself it was not used by the so called ‘ Parliament Reichstag no longer a democratic institution which sat in the Kroll Oper now disappeared . The Reichstag building survived the heavy bombing of Berlin/GPE but the fighting between the Soviets and Germans ended almost at the same time as the Reichstag was taken and heavily damaged and burnt by Soviet soldiers – there is a famous photo of a Soviet soldier hoisting the Soviet flag on the Reichstag . This building was the symbol of Fascism for the Soviets so it had to be destroyed and for some time it was almost a place of pilgrimage for them . 4 A park near the Brandenburg Gate 5 Office of the Reichskanzler ie Prime Minister from 1933 to 1945 Adolf Hitler 6 Keitel – Chief of the OKW Oberkommando der Wehrmacht – Supreme Command of the Army 1938 1945 . 
her father and mother side Mrs Privat ancestors were baptised since the years 1859 and 1823 respectively . When she had to declare her origin to the Reichsschrifttumskammer her Aryan husband divorced her on 2 June 1938 in order to remain in the position of earning her and their daughter subsistence . Although her Jewish descent was known to every neighbour at Lankwitz/GPE near Berlin/GPE where they lived as well as to the police and Gestapo she was not called up to do forced labour nor was she deported . She never knew if it was due to a mistake of the Gestapo or to the secret help of a kindly police officer that she has been spared p.2 4 . Already in the year 1939 the Gestapo had wrongly decided that she was to be considered as half Jewish p.2 . 9 . Further References Dr. phil . Karl Privat Ullstein book publishers p.1 . Mixed marriages p.1 3 . Non Jews helping Jews p.1 4 . A J identity card withdrawn p.2 . Mischling p.3 . Housekeeper with Brigitte Horney actress Babelsberg p.3 . Exempt From Deportation due to a Gestapo Error or Secret Help of a Non Jew ? I am the daughter of Dr. phil . Robert Hirsch and his wife Anna née Lehmann . My father parents were General Medical Adviser Prof. Dr. August Hirsch and his wife Pauline née Friedlaender . These grandparents of mine had themselves and their 3 children baptized in 1859 at the Dorotheenstaedtish Church in Berlin/GPE . My mother family was of Jewish descent but my grandfather Dr. Emil Lehmann in Hamburg/GPE had already been baptized in 1823 as a child even before his parents . From this entire background it followed that I had no relationship with the Jewish religion . After the Abitur A level exam I studied Classical Philology and Archaeology in Goettingen/LOC Berlin/GPE and Marburg/LOC from 1917 – 1922 achieved my higher degree in Marburg/LOC in 1933 and my PhD at the end of the same year in Berlin/GPE . After a brief professional employment at the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae in Munich/GPE I married Dr. phil . Karl Privat Frankfurt/GPE on 17 April 1924 . My husband was an Aryan and worked as editor at the publishing firm of Ullstein in Berlin/GPE later German Publishing House . Consequently my daughter and I were initially not affected by the actions against the Jews by the Nazi government . We were living in Lankwitz/GPE an area entirely well disposed towards Hitler . My circle of acquaintances consisted mainly of Christian families who despite certain reservations were not particularly negatively inclined towards National Socialism . Nevertheless not one person out of this circle withdrew from us limited contact with us or hurt me with insensitive remarks quite the opposite when my husband was unemployed through the limitation of production at Ullstein publishers between 1932 and the end of 1934 we received the kindliest help . This although it was widely known that I was of Jewish extraction . In all political discussions the National Socialist actions against the Jewish population were condemned emphatically from the very start . The only two incidents from these early days of National Socialism that I can recall are 1 that the mother of a classmate of my daughter prevented my daughter from appearing as a Christmas Angel in the Christmas production at her school and 2 that in February 1936 an official of the NSDAP occasionally appeared at our flat and demanded we retract the flag . The National Socialist race laws only began to play a noticeable part in my life when my husband was asked at the end of 1937 to present his and my proof of descent at the National Documentation Chamber . In order to avoid endangering his position at the German Publishing House and thus his ability to support me and my daughter he divorced me on 2 June 1938 . I was the innocent party as at that time the Jewish descent of one partner was no reason for a divorce . However immediately after the divorce my situation as a Jewess worsened because on 17 July 1938 the order was given that required every Jew in Germany/GPE to hand in their passports to request an ID card marked J and to inform by the end of the year three registry offices that they i.e. the women would have the additional name Sara from 1 January 1939 . I believed that I still had a small chance of avoiding this requirement . But when I obtained my grandfather certificate of baptism from Hamburg/GPE this showed clearly that he was the son of two Jewish parents . This was not evident from my maternal grandmother certificate of baptism . Of course I was not able to conceal the Jewish descent of my paternal grandparents as they had been baptized as adults . In addition the church authorities had noted on the extract from the church records which we had requested This baptism is considered in form and content a baptism of Jews . As three Jewish grandparents were sufficient to make me count as fully Jewish I consequently came into the category of this order . In 1937 I had already once been summoned to the Gestapo to make declarations about my descent . I had deliberately left open the question as to whether I was fully or half Jewish in order not to endanger my sister emigration as half Jewish . At the start of 1939 I again received a request from the Gestapo to present my papers which I did immediately . When I enquired in May I was told that they were being examined at a very high authority . In July the police in Lankwitz/GPE informed me that the papers had been returned with the notification that I was half Jewish . This declaration must of course have been based on an error which was never cleared up . The police officer in Lankwitz/GPE who had issued my J ID card very kindly made sure that it would be taken back . Right until the end of the war I never possessed a normal ID card as I did not want to go as far as to sign against my better knowledge that I was not of full Jewish descent . Seen from the outside I was now relatively safe . However I had certainly put myself into a dangerous situation because it was well known that the most severe punishments were given for keeping one Jewish descent secret and I knew perfectly well what would happen if this deception was ever discovered . I might therefore say that I felt under extraordinary threat for the entire period of time until the end of National Socialism . Above all I had to prevent my papers from being examined again by any official organization . For this reason it was impossible for me take a job in as far as I was even allowed to work as a half Jewess . Far more important than for me was the decision about our descent for my daughter who was now considered of mixed race II which enabled her to stay at her school and take the Abitur A level exam whereas she would have had to leave if of mixed race I . However the situation became rather critical when I learnt from a neighbour in our building that the security department of a branch of Siemens in Marienfelde/LOC where her husband had intended to install my daughter as an apprentice had been informed by the Gestapo that I was fully Jewish and had to adopt the name Sara . Roughly at the same time the Party in Lankwitz/GPE had begun a campaign against me – something I did not find out until after the war . My flat had already been allocated to someone else without my knowledge and my removal was about to happen when the house Lankwitz/GPE Muehlstrasse/STREET 39 a was destroyed by a bomb on 24 August 1943 which made the impending orders and void . My neighbours told me after the war that – whilst I still had great illusions about the safety of my situation – they had expected night after night that I would be arrested . As I was convinced that the Lankwitz/GPE police had me registered as mixed race I I avoided for as long as possible registering with the police elsewhere . For a few months I therefore lived illegally at various addresses until I left Berlin/GPE eventually and took on the position of housekeeper with the actress Brigitte Horney in Babelsberg/LOC . At her house I experienced the collapse and the occupation by the Russians . Naturally my worries had increased greatly when towards the end of 1943 the privileges for divorcees from mixed marriages were cancelled because now I had to be aware that even though one department had me registered as half Jewish another might take a closer look and initiate my deportation to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . Luckily this did not happen . Equally I was never obliged to do forced labour which was the rule for half Jews because the police in Lankwitz/GPE had transferred my details to the police in Potsdam/GPE without the annotation Half Jew or mixed race I . I never found out with any certainty whether my salvation was due to the humanity of the police officer in Lankwitz/GPE who had always been helpful or whether this was an error by the Gestapo . In fact after the war I had repeated difficulties in convincing official institutions of the truthfulness of my fantastical story as they called it . Grotesquely I had to present the documents of my descent in order to prove that my statements were the truth . 
brief account about the Muttchen Schneider of Potsdam/GPE who had turned from an enthusiastic Hitler follower to a courageous resistance fighter and whose personal sacrifices brought about her premature death . 9 . Further References Dr. Harald Poelchau parson at Ploetzensee/LOC prison . Wartegau . Frau Latte of Breslau/CAMP one of Frau Schneider underground protegees . Baum member of resistance . See related report P.III.g . Germany/GPE No . 518 for further information . Mrs Schneider a Brave Old Lady from Potsdam/GPE In July 1944 I met an extraordinarily brave woman Muttchen Old Lady Schneider who lived at Wielandstr . 22 Potsdam/GPE . I had just escaped Gestapo custody and had been given her address by Dr Harald Pölchau a chaplain at Plötzensee Prison . Mrs Schneider was a chaplain widow . In the years that followed 1933 she herself would tell you she was a devoted Hitler supporter living in what was then the Warthegau/LOC . She and her small daughter obeyed her Führer when he set out his Heim ins Reich back home to the Reich/LOC foreign policy . She slowly began to open her eyes here and the devoted Nazi supporter became a passionate opponent of the criminal regime . She joined the Confessing Church and raised her daughter in the way she thought was right . But this was soon not enough for the brave woman . From 1942 onwards she constantly hid destitute illegal Jews in her home . One of them was Ms Latte from Wrocław/LOC whose son is still alive . She did this out of a sense of justice humanity and to make some amends for her earlier support for Hitler which made her feel like she was partly to blame . When Dr Pölchau told her about my situation she took it a step further and actively helped the political resistance movement by hiding a fleeing prisoner for the Baum Group a Communist resistance movement in her home . She clearly understood the consequences of getting caught which could only mean death . She offered me shelter shared her food rations with me and showed me human kindness . She did not have it easy with me . Night after night when I first escaped I would wake up screaming and the walls of this new build apartment were thin . The one week I was supposed to stay with her became five long weeks which must have got on her nerves . But she never made those feelings known to me . Then Dr Harald Pölchau 2 surprised me with some forged documents and a new place to live in Anklam/LOC . At the time the trains to Anklam/LOC departed from Oranienburg/CAMP and I had to get there on the S Bahn commuter train from Potsdam/GPE . I needed to change trains at Gesundbrunnen/LOC station/LOC near where I used to live . I was really well known to the Gestapo informants and I was now really scared of taking this journey . So the brave lady did one last thing for me she came with me to Oranienburg/CAMP and disguised me as a typical Potsdam/GPE local . I later found out that she sheltered more Herzblättchen little sweethearts as she called the illegals . When I went back to find her in autumn 1945 she was so weak as a result of the years of hunger she had always shared her food rations from 1942 onwards . Despite the fact that we took care of her she wasted away and passed away part way through 1946 . 
personal report of a young girl who was deported from Stettin/GPE to Poland/GPE . Stating many details she describes the unbelievable sufferings she has witnessed and gone through herself in twelve camps . Before crematoriums were built people were suffocated in disinfecting stoves p.2 . Aktion the shooting of Jewish men and women at Majdanek/CAMP from 6 am to 9 pm on 30 November 1943 p.4 . people were marched to Gross/CAMP Rosen/CAMP through the cold of January 1945 for eight days the way was shown through thousands of corpses lying on both sides on the road no food then they continued the journey by train for another week without food finally there were fifty dead in each wagon . And for the next fortnight they had to live under circumstances which made the women kill each other p.5 6 . Typhoid fever p.5 6 . Together with six boys and three girls the author succeeded to rescue fifty sick internees from being burnt by the Nazis at the approach of the Americans . Three cyclists pretending to belong to the American Red Cross followed by others with machine guns p.7 definitive escape . youth transport to Switzerland/GPE . 9 . References Radom Schydlowce/LOC cemetery transport of to Treblinka/CAMP Szkollna/CAMP p.1 Majdanek/CAMP p.1 4 Plaszow/CAMP p.2 3 Wilhelmsburg/LOC p.3 Auschwitz/CAMP p.3 6 Birkenau/GPE p.3 5 Oranienburg/CAMP p.5 Ravensbrück/CAMP p.5 6 Gross/CAMP Rosen/CAMP p.5 Taucha/LOC near Leipzig/CAMP p.6 7 . Bombed at Magdeburg/CAMP . Sachsenhausen/CAMP p.1 . SS Dr. Böttcher Polizeiführer Hans Schippers Untersturmführer Blum Weinreich/LOC Hauptsturmführer Kapke Exekutionsführer p.1 Untersturmführer Tuman p.2 4 5 Hauptsturmführer Gett used to have groups of twenty men strangled in the presence of thousands of internees p.3 Untersturmführer Müller was in the habit to set his dog on persons who were not working quickly enough p.3 . Women lacerated by dogs p.4 Boys from Slovakia/GPE torn to pieces by dogs at a performance attended by the Slovakian girls who nearly all went mad and were sent to the crematorium similar shows were taking place daily p.4 . ‘ Himmlers Musterlager at Auschwitz/CAMP leader Obersturmführer Haessler p.5 . Physicians Tilo Mengele p.3 5 Obersturmführer Dr. Blanke p.1 3 . SS Aufseherinnen Luise Danz p.2 6 Erna Ehlert Alice Orlowska Meier Ruth Haselow p.2 5 Weber p.2 . SS Oberaufseherinnen Elfriede Schröder who killed 5000 children p.1 3 Zarecka p.5 . Medical experiments p.4 . Capoes p.2 4 . Volksstuhm p.7 . Malchow/CAMP p.6 camp in Mecklenburg/LOC . Experiences in Twelve/CAMP Concentration Camps I Irmgard Berger born on 11.09.1927 in Stettin/GPE have experienced the following We my mother and 5 children were deported from Germany/GPE to Poland/GPE in 1938 my father was forcibly detained in Germany/GPE and on 9.09 . 1939 he was taken to the Sachsenhausen/CAMP concentration camp . We lived in groups homeless until 1940 then we were sent to the forced labour camp in Radom/GPE that was under the leadership of and Polizeifuehrer Dr. Boettcher . His deputy was Untersturmfuehrer Hans Schippers . We worked in a weapons factory and in workshops and the people in charge of the work were Haupsturmfuehrer Blum and Weinreich . The Exekutionsfuehrer who arranged the shootings with the Ukranians was called Kapke . Boettcher arranged an Aktion during Purim at which everyone who was interested in the trip to Palestine/GPE was to come forward . Matters were dealt with as if they really were preparing for a trip abroad but on the very day when they were due to depart two cars with Ukrainians under the leadership of Untersturmfuehrer Kapke stood ready behind the camp and they drove the cars containing the travellers en route to Palestine/GPE to the cemetery in Schydlowce/LOC where 150 people had to dig their own graves were stripped naked and were then shot dead . My girl friend who was actually there reported this to me and she was fortunate enough to be able to save herself . There was an expulsion in Radom on 13th January 1942 a so called deportation . Of Jews were selected and the rest were sent to Treblinka/CAMP . This was a camp that had been in existence since 1942 and where thousands of people were killed on a daily basis . As far as I know people were taken there in wagons the floor of the wagon opened up the people fell into ditches and there they were gassed and burnt . I saw with my own eyes how during this deportation small children were grabbed by the legs and flung head first against the wall so that their skulls shattered and their brains gushed out . Women who were expecting had their stomachs slit open with swords . Those who were somewhat frail or sick were pushed to the ground and immediately shot dead . Families were forcibly torn apart . This all happened under the leadership of Boettcher Blum and Weinreich . Those who were left over after the deportation were taken to a concentration camp on the Szkollna/LOC . Selections took place there time and time again . Children old people frail people were selected based on their previous ordeals and they were shot and killed . On 3rd of March 1942 we were transported to Maidanek/CAMP Lublin/CAMP on the pretence that we were being taken to a better camp . Meanwhile my elder brother had emigrated in 1940 he had managed to travel to Berlin/GPE and to emigrate to America/GPE . We were separated from my brothers in Maidanek/GPE my sister my mother and I remained together . When we reached Maidanek/LOC we had to undress fully in front of Obersturmfuehrer Dr. Blanke senior doctor in Maidanek/LOC and the Oberaufseherin Elfriede Schroeder the latter certainly had the deaths of around 2 children on her hands various valuables were taken from us we were inspected from top to toe in case we had any hidden valuables . Any rings on fingers which could not be pulled off were removed with shears . If anyone had earrings then the earlobe was simply cut off it made no difference at all . We were then bundled into a bathing area where there was hardly enough water to make us wet then we were bundled out into a cold room where we had to wait for hours on end until each of us received a torn and flea ridden shirt that was completely the wrong size some clothes and heavy clogs . It all happened terribly quickly . If anyone was unable to get dressed in a hurry they were beaten and then we were bundled in front of the orderly room where we had to wait all day long until we had been registered . We each received our own completed records and a death sentence to sign . On arrival at the camp we were separated from the men from the transport and we had no opportunity to speak to them ever again . If we happened to meet the men on the way to work we were not allowed to look at them otherwise we would be beaten . Some female supervisors battered the women obsessively these were Luise Danz Erna Ehlert Alice Orlowska Meier Ruth Haselow and Mrs Weber . We also had prisoner capos women who were previous society misfits and who were the most despicable people imaginable . The death angel of Maidanek the murderer of 1942 was called Obersturmfuehrer Tuman . Whenever he crossed the street with his dog you knew that he himself was going to shoot and kill some victims that same day . Up until 1943 people were suffocated in disinfection ovens after that crematoriums were built . Various small children were escorted to the ovens by Oberaufseherin Schroeder herself with promises of chocolate . The men principally the Jewish men had a terrible time . German career criminals who were mainly dressed as hangman capos in red hangman outfits took charge of the internal administration of the male camps . Whenever a detachment whether male or female went out to work they received orders to bring back only 100 of the 300 . The capos had to kill these people with their bare hands they were given any guns for this purpose and the survivors were made to drag the dead all the way back after their hard labour . The capos carried out their executions with glee . The SS men and women roared with laughter as the bone weary people towed the corpses back . At the start of 1943 those people who were deemed to be strong were transported to Plaszow/CAMP near Cracow/GPE . This was a camp where nearly all the women worked in the stone quarry and where the standards of hygiene were particularly atrocious . Dr. Blanke and Elfriede Schroeder also came to Plasznow/CAMP together with their staff and carried on with the same rigmarole as they had in Maidanek/CAMP . In June at the height of summer we were deprived 3 of water for 4 days . People who were working in the stone quarry under the hot sun had to swelter without water . I was made to work in a brickyard and had to carry out heavy duties on three machines all at the same time without any eye protection or anything similar and I had to work 12 hours a day . Hauptsturmfuehrer Gett was the camp commandant who derived particular pleasure from frequently having 20 men strangled and thousands of prisoners were made to watch this spectacle . It was impossible to stay alive for more than 3 months with the provisions they gave us there . The work shift leader was Untersturmfuehrer Mueller . He had the habit of walking between the workers with his large dog and letting the dog molest anybody who was slacking and in so doing these people were mauled and lacerated . I witnessed this happening . Camp commandant Gett and his staff lived in a splendid palace which Jews had built for him . They allowed Jews to cook their meals and wait upon them whilst at the same time allowing others to be trampled by horses or to be killed with revolvers . In August we were then transported from there and taken to a camp in Wilhemsburg/CAMP which had been rebuilt and where 700 women and men were made to work in salt mines . The work the women had to do was terrible and not one woman was able to cope with it . The SS Untersturmfuehrers who supervised the work laid explosives in these mines i.e. at the work sites they then hounded the unsuspecting girls and women into them and thereby killed a very large number of them on a daily basis and then they boasted about their heroic exploits in the evenings . We were sent to Plaszow/CAMP again 3 months later where we worked in a laundry and then after a short period of time we were sent to Auschwitz/CAMP . On arriving in Auschwitz/CAMP as a result of a three year spell in concentration camps we were given the privilege of being the first to be selected for a bath . We were brought into the sauna in order to bathe and there we had to stand naked for 12 hours in front of men then Dr. Mengele and Dr. Tilo awaited us who with the greatest cruelty imaginable sent people to die with a point of the finger . Most people went to the gas chamber . And the 500 survivors of the who arrived were squashed together like animals naked and herded into the so called hairdressing salon where various hairs on the head and body were cut off . The fortunate ones who survived hairless and injured from the beatings went into a hall where they were wetted with a little vinegar herded out again and then handed over to the female supervisors who looked terrifying were drunk and acted in a totally arbitrary manner . On leaving the building they were then marched into the camp wearing their most ridiculous clothing and at the crematorium they encountered those people who had been selected by the doctor still standing and waiting looking at us through their deeply unhappy eyes . We arrived at the Birkenau/CAMP B2B camp . Words can not describe the conditions in this camp . 17 women slept on a plank bed just 2 m long . The hunger was indescribable . Whoever went to see doctor or signed in sick was certain to die . Every day 4 Dr. Mengele and Dr. Tilo commenced their selections afresh and every day new victims were selected . On one day there was a particularly horrendous selection . All the women were pushed in front of the blocks naked the terrain was very marshy and a source of malaria the women feet were bound together by the capos then Dr. Tilo and Dr. Mengele came and ordered them to run . Because this was an impossible thing to do most of the women could do as they had been ordered and so they were torn apart by the Zugfuehrers dogs . I lost 3 of my best female friends in this way . It all resembled a play from the time of Nero . On another occasion they made a selection of adolescent boys who had come to Auschwitz/CAMP in 1942 from Slovakia/GPE mostly boys between 18 and 22 years of age . The boys were led into a barrack building where a play was due to be put on . The girls who also arrived on this transport were invited to this prologue and they had to sit there and watch as the boys were gradually led in and torn apart by fierce starved dogs . The girls were often relatives of these unfortunates . They nearly all went mad were loaded onto muck lorries and taken into the crematorium . This and similar types of theatre was played out in Auschwitz/CAMP Birkenau/CAMP on a daily basis . At that time there was a well known institution in Auschwitz/CAMP where similarly under the leadership of Dr. Mengele and Trilo young German doctors used to practice medicine on living human beings . Every day prisoners who looked as if they were just about still alive were hauled to that place and there they had their blood taken a half a litre at a time . This procedure was carried out on myself twice . Others were injected with malaria or typhus . After these injections these illnesses took hold in such a virulent manner that it was impossible to offer up any resistance . I managed twice with a lot of effort to escape from such a fate . However it was long before the malaria took hold and we my mother my sister and me were brought back to Maidanek/CAMP as malaria sufferers at the start of 1944 . When we arrived we met just 340 Jewish women from the whole Maidanek/CAMP community . These were the 350 survivors from the Aktion of 3rd November 1943 . On that day Jewish men and women had been shot and killed from 6 in the morning until 9 in the evening . The executions were led by Untersturmfuehrer Tuman and took place in the following manner people marched naked onto the so called sixth field the crematorium field and each of them was provided with just one shot it did matter whether the shot was fatal or just wounding they fell into the ditches which Jews had dug earlier . According to statements from the crematorium workers many of these people were still alive 3 days later and they were pulled alive from under the earth and set alight . I heard about this from a young woman who was present at this Aktion and who was made to watch the death of her husband without being able to accompany him . The 350 women and 150 men who were left over after the Aktion who were all the healthiest and strongest of the many thousands were provided with an A which 5 stood for Aktionsjuden and they were sent to the crematorium in Auschwitz/CAMP at the earliest opportunity because they had refused to die in the crematorium in Maidanek/CAMP after what they had experienced . The Maidanek/CAMP camp was disbanded in October 1944 because the Russians were approaching and we were sent back to Auschwitz/CAMP . When we arrived back in Birkenau/CAMP we experienced the same procedure as before and any short hair which had grown back was once again cut off . This time however Mengele did not spare us and he selected my sister as one of those to go into the gas chamber . I managed to get hold of a Russian prisoner of war outfit to wrap my sister up in a bundle of clothes and so get her away from the crematorium . It was a moment good fortune one second later and it would have been impossible to get my sister out of the crematorium . When we got to Birkenau/CAMP we were selected for a work group for forced labour . I enrolled as a female printer although I had no idea what the work entailed and I managed after being whipped by Oberaufseherin Zarecka to take my mother and my sister with me . We were supposed to go to Auschwitz/CAMP to Himmler Musterlager model camp . Obersturmfuehrer Hessler was the leader of this model camp . On the way into Auschwitz/CAMP model camp we were led through the the so called FKL Frauenkonzentrationslager lit . womens concentration camp meanwhile we were selected a further 3 times by Dr. Mengele . We remained in Auschwitz/CAMP until the rapid approach of the Russian Front in January 1945 . All of a sudden the SS began to burn various files and one evening we were ordered to decamp and human beings left the Auschwitz/CAMP KZ with all its internees . We always walked in groups and the SS drove us on throughout the night at such a pace that it was impossible to keep up . January cold snow attacking aircraft etc . Anyone who sat down for a minute was immediately shot and killed . The thousands of dead who lay alongside the road showed us the way . We laid down for 8 days . Frozen to the bone and suffering from various illnesses we eventually reached Gross Rosen . Once there we were still not fed in spite of having gone for 8 days without food placed in open cattle trucks 150 people to a truck and taken via Oranienburg/CAMP where the men were offloaded to the female concentration camp at Ravensbrück/CAMP . On arrival we found 50 dead in each truck . However they had fared better than those who had now arrived in Ravensbrück/CAMP . Corpses are better looking than the women who walked about in Ravensbrück/CAMP . With their heads shaven in large wooden clogs famished and covered in spots in putrid grey clothes in the icy January cold they walked in the mud that came up to their knees and carried heavy stones on their shoulders . They were followed around by female supervisors amongst them was that Haserlow the one with the mocking laugh and she goaded them on with a dog whip . On arrival however we were led into a barrack building with other transports from Auschwitz/CAMP a barrack building which normally had space for 100 people 6 and women were stuffed into this confined space . We had gone for 8 days without water and food we had eaten only snow in the wagons and when it did fall almost all of us got typhoid from the dirty snow however we were to starve for a further 7 days . There are no words to describe how cramped it was and the supervisors just stood there and shook with laughter whenever a woman beat another one to death in order to find just a bit of space where she could lay her head . It was impossible to get out of the barrack building because that was tantamount to being beaten to death by your co habitants . This lasted 14 days . We were led back into the main Ravensbrück/CAMP camp and after a further 5 days and after a further selection by the Untersturmfuehrer we were loaded into wagons and transported away . We breathed a sigh of relief but not for long . We were taken to Malchow/CAMP Mecklenburg/CAMP . Here there were already a further women from Auschwitz/CAMP who worked in underground powder factories and who looked like corpses . On arrival to our horror we encountered Mrs Aufsehrin Lise Danz who was there as a female supervisor . We knew then that our fate was sealed . This murderer withheld all the food from us and let us starve albeit we were working . The daily death toll on the parade ground where depending on the mood of Mrs Danz we would spend 4 or 5 hours was 50 women on average . Always observant she supervised the rows on the parade ground and if she saw a woman who did look presentable she would pull this person towards her and beat her until she died . Words can not describe the conditions in Malchow/CAMP . Death by starvation is the worst type of death typhoid was rife amongst the people . We slept in a small barrack room which had previously been used as a horse stable on the floor with no blankets which was the ideal breeding ground for epidemics . That lasted 3 months . The death rate and the epidemics became too great and because the Front was already approaching too close to send the people to the crematorium Mrs Danz sent women to Taucha/CAMP near Leipzig/CAMP in the belief that they would be bombarded to death in the wagons . However luck was on our side and we travelled for 2 days and 2 nights without being caught out by a single bomb . We reached Magdeburg/CAMP right in the middle of a severe bombing raid on the station itself . Our locomotive was bombed several SS men were wounded and yet none of us fell victim to the bombing . Consequently we arrived safe and sound much to the annoyance of Miss Danz . We were divided into two groups at this point one part went to Leipzig/CAMP Hassag and the other one to Taucha/CAMP Hassage we were in Taucha/CAMP . The camp was awful however compared to our previous camp in Malchow/CAMP this hell seemed like paradise . Every night we had to lie in front of the barracks because of air raid warnings guarded by the SS who were scared that we would spy on them . Then the final evacuations started . The camp was disbanded and everything had to be taken further on foot in no particular direction in order as the Germans used to say 7 not to be murdered by the Americans or the Russians . We knew that all this walking meant we were going to die because the SS took those who had not died of hunger or frozen to death on route to a particular place where they were shot down . I undertook that if I were to die then it would be in the camp and that I would no longer carry on walking . We hid in a barrack building and lay there for 3 days . When we looked out with our hearts thumping only the gravely ill remained in the camp i.e. those who were unfit for transportation the SS had partly retreated and the Volkssturm had taken over the camp . Words can not describe how overjoyed we were from that minute onwards . We believed and yet we could not believe that we had been liberated . This was on 15th April . The half dead started to recuperate and we eagerly anticipated the Americans who we could hear firing in the distance . We hoisted flags on top of the SS Fuehrers barracks flags sewn together from various rags and representing all the nationalities of the 100 people left behind in the camp and we awaited the American troops with flowers in our hands . However our liberation was not to be that straightforward . On 18th April three days after the SS had withdrawn two men came towards us as we were sitting down to lunch they had been severely burned and no sooner had they arrived than they fell unconscious . The camp doctor a Jewish Czech examined them more closely and we noticed how these men had burned feet and that they had fallen unconscious because of the pain . Gasping desperately they told us Save yourselves from the fires . At that very moment we saw how the Volkssturm men locked up the barracks containing the sick people chased the others into the barracks closed the window shutters and began to set fire to the barrack buildings . We were the only 10 healthy people in the camp . Using all our strength we opened the barrack buildings and shouted to people to jump if they could . 6 healthy boys and 4 healthy girls ran from one barrack building to another and saved as many as they could into the nearby garden where we covered the sick with grass and flowers so that no one could know what was there . We managed to save just 50 people because the SS noticed what we were up to . We immediately started to run away on our own in order to find cover in different directions presuming that the Americans must be somewhere around . We ran approximately 5 kilometres in the awful uncertainty that we did know what would happen to those we had left behind and in the end we came to a wood where we thought we could take a breather . However 3 cyclists who had red crosses on their arms came past at that very moment and straight faced they introduced themselves as representatives of the American Red Cross . They asked us to wait a few minutes so that they could bring us food and bandages . Most of us believed this charade . However some of us used all the strength in our bodies to convince them that this was just another SS hoax . Our words turned out to be TRUE . A few minutes later we saw 10 cyclists with machine guns on their shoulders who were laughing wildly and getting closer to the wood . We believed 8 the game was finally up yet at the very last moment we caught sight of a small stream which flowed nearby . We threw stones and twigs into the stream to build a bridge we stood with the water coming up to our thighs and carried across the sick and the frail . We managed to bring everyone across before the fiends could get to us . We ran as fast as our legs could carry us and after running for 20 minutes we saw something that was camouflaged and a ditch in front of us . Because we did care anymore and because we could no longer summon the energy to run any further we fell into the ditch regardless of what might be in it . Our watchword was either dead or alive . However we were both astonished and glad at the same time when we stumbled into the ditch and saw a shocked American soldier there . We were so glad that we did know what to do we embraced him and that was when we became aware of what was actually happening . The Americans who were only there as an advance platoon immediately took us to the village of Doenitz/LOC where we spent the night in a barn and the following morning we were handed over to some German farmers who were under orders to give us the run of their houses and homes . But our energy levels were at such a low ebb that we were unable to bear anything other than what we had been used to . A large number of us died by eating too quickly or by eating too much fat and with that the tragedy just carried on . However when we arrived in Poenitz/GPE the Czech doctor arranged for several Americans to drive a Red Cross truck to the place where we had hidden the sick in the greenery and to collect them from there . A German villa was immediately converted into a hospital and American doctors cared for the half dead people . During the return journey we caught sight of a few people in the wood . We assumed that they were the SS men who were still looking for us because the whole thing was only a matter of 20 minutes . Once the sick were safe some of us trekked into the wood with the Americans and there we found several SS men who lay hidden intending to make a foray into the village and thus surprise the Americans from the rear . After we had spent several weeks in Poenitz/GPE recovering we were brought to a hotel in Leipzig/CAMP for security reasons where there were already various women who had been rescued from the camps . It was our intention to hunt down our murderers . A short time later we drove to Buchenwald/CAMP in order to go from there to Switzerland/GPE aboard a youth transport . I still miss my father Fritz Berger to this day born 10.10.1889 in Stanislau/LOC and my brother Joachim Berger born 22.10.1933 in Stettin/GPE . I can claim with a clear conscience that what I have described here represents just a very small part of the truly indescribable suffering we endured in 12 different concentration camps . 
Wolff had remained in Berlin/GPE throughout the Nazi terror . In 1942 she was told to prepare for deportation . She went to hide with non Jewish friends but on a pre arranged signal returned to her home when nobody had come for her . Her caretaker supplied her with food . After a second threat of deportation which once again did not materialise other Christian friends arranged for her to work at Berlin/GPE airport so that she could get an air ticket in an emergency . However she could not avail herself of this chance as she received yet another deportation order . Although non Jews offered her refuge she arranged with another fugitive to flee to Switzerland/GPE . A Chistian woman gave her her own identity card others helped with food and the necessary preparations . The cook of friends in Frankfurt/GPE took the two women by train to her parents in a little village near Frankfurt/GPE . From here they walked for miles until they reached an inn beyond the German Swiss frontier . A friendly frontier guard took them to the police station in Hemmingshofen/LOC who sent them to Schaffhausen/GPE where they were imprisoned for illegal entry of the country . The Jewish community there eventually arranged for their transfer to a hostel and looked after them for six weeks . Meanwhile the author could contact her lawyer in Switzerland/GPE to whom the author daughter had sent money . Although he could identify her the women were sent to several refugee camps Sumiswald Kanton Emmenthal a hotel in Lucern/LOC surrounded by barbed wire Bökten/LOC and Liestal until they met the daughter of a senior official who restored them to liberty . The author remained another two years in Switzerland/GPE and then joined her daughter in England/GPE . For some years she had a position as companion to an old lady and now she lives in the Otto Schiff House in London/GPE . 9 . Further References Martha Steinitz Quaker . Non Jews helped me escape Elise Wolff née Steinitz . Born 15 April 1884 in Gleiwitz/LOC in Upper/GPE Silesia/GPE . She moved to Berlin/GPE as a child . She was married and had one daughter . Her husband died before the Nazi era . Mrs Wolff did want to leave Berlin/GPE when the Nazis came in order not to lose her financial independence . In 1942 she received written notification that she was to prepare for collection and deportation . She immediately left her home and moved in with Christian friends . She got a message from her lodger by means of a pre arranged signal saying that no one had come to fetch her . Mrs Wolff went back to her apartment where the concierge secretly provided her with food . After a few weeks a further notification arrived informing her that she would be collected . Again this was probably overlooked and in any case no one came . Mrs Wolff was now anxious and decided if possible to emigrate . She felt very isolated as her telephone and radio had been taken and also she had to give up her dog and bird . Jews were not allowed to travel on the trams but as Mrs Wolff did look Jewish she dared to go out without her Jewish star and use public transport . This meant that on the advice of an acquaintance Christin in a mixed marriage she could get to the job centre in Neuköln/LOC . Her acquaintance was in contact on her behalf with a gentleman who had taken preparatory steps for her at the job centre . Here she had no problems and was told she should go to the airport Göring Werk and show the identification card given to her for this purpose . If she was then allowed to pass through to go to the owner of the airport restaurant where she would get work . She was taken on and had to start the following morning cleaning vegetables . The cost of this arrangement was German marks . This play gave Mrs Wolff the opportunity to access the airport and get an airline ticket if she needed to . However this did not materialise . When Mrs Wolff got home from the airport she found a further notification about her imminent collection whereupon she decided to leave Berlin/GPE immediately . Other Christian friends had offered to keep her in hiding but this no longer felt safe enough . By chance she learnt of another women who on that very same evening wanted to go over the ‘ green border to Switzerland/GPE . Mrs Wolff said she would go with her . Everything was hastily put in place . Obtaining an identity card made out in a FALSE name was a necessary precondition for the escape . Again help came from Christians a woman lent Mrs Wolff her postal identity card . She met her at the railway station at an agreed time and gave it to her as well as providing her with food for the journey . Mrs Wolff asked a passing soldier to get her a ticket to Frankfurt am Main which he handed over to her . She risked her escape with this ticket and her FALSE identity card . Her travel companion met her in front of the train as talked about . However they travelled in different compartments so as not to draw attention to themselves and be caught together . Once in Frankfurt/GPE they met in the waiting room . The cook for a family in Frankfurt/GPE who had been told of their arrival by Mrs Wolff travelling companion spoke to them in passing as it were and gave them a sign to follow her . She took the two women to her parents house in a small village not far from Frankfurt/GPE . They were peasant farmers who unsuspectingly took in the two refugees . The next morning while the family and also the neighbours were at church Mrs Wolff and her companion left secretly to make their way to the border . They walked for four hours in the searing heat until they saw an inn which they knew was located on the other side of the border . By this time they were extremely exhausted . Here they were given a warm welcome even though the greeting Heil Hitler gave them a bit of a scare . It was long until a border guard appeared who the proprietor had telephoned for the purpose of reporting their arrival . The official appeared friendly but it was his duty to take them to the nearest police station . In the small village of Hemmingshofen/LOC they were handed over to another official who put them in a prison cell for the night . Here they could rest a little . The guard brought them food and used the opportunity to rail against Hitler . The next day they were taken further to a destination unknown to them . They got out at the Swiss town Schaffhausen/GPE where they were imprisoned for illegally crossing the border . Both women were interrogated for two hours and had their fingerprints taken . The local Jewish community was advised but they had to wait three days before they heard from them and were found accommodation in the hostel Haus Martha where they were allowed to stay for six weeks at the expense of the Jewish community . Meanwhile they made contact with a Swiss lawyer who had been introduced to them in Berlin/GPE . He identified himself to them and gave them the money Mrs Wolff daughter had transferred to him . They were moved on further to Sumiswald/LOC canton Emmenthel/LOC . This was a camp where 45 refugees lived and the care was good . From here they were sent on again – but this time to a comfortable hotel in Luzern/GPE which was set up for refugees . The hotel grounds were enclosed behind barbed wire . After they were transported to a further two camps in Bökten/LOC and Liestal/LOC they then had a chance encounter with a senior official in Thun/LOC Swabia/LOC whose father secured their freedom . Mrs Wolff lived freely in Switzerland/GPE for another two years in various locations partly as a guest and partly living off her own money . She spent a total of four years in Switzerland/GPE and her verdict she said I only ever had it good . Mrs Wolff daughter lived in Spain/GPE until she left because of the civil war and moved to France/GPE . Then Quaker Mrs Martha Steinitz requested that she should be allowed to come to England/GPE . Here she lived in Reading . She obtained entry to England/GPE for her mother who at first lived with her . After four months Mrs Wolff took up the position of companion to an elderly lady – a position she held for the next four years . She then returned to live with her daughter until 1956 when she moved to Otto Schiff House where I recorded this testimony . Comments on page 2 after repeated questioning Mrs Wolff indicated she could remember exactly where the border crossing took place . She said that she travelled with her companion as far as Randolfszell/CAMP close to the Swiss border but does remember if it was by train . There they were led by the cook to the cook parents . From here it was four hours and they ran across the border . Hemmingshofen/LOC is in Switzerland/GPE . 
Meyring reports on the wholesale deportation of the Jewish community of Stettin/GPE to Lublin/CAMP people among them about 100 children and young people which already took place in February 1940 . She describes the transport itself the terrible cold many people became ill and her aged husband delirious died soon after the misery of the three Jewish villages in the neighbourhood of Lublin/CAMP where they had to stay with the poorest of the poor . Mrs Meyring is one of the few if not the sole survivor of the Lublin/CAMP deportation . Though it was not possible to emigrate after already been deported Mrs Meyring owing to a clerical mistake was allowed to emigrate to Sweden/LOC what had been granted to her just before the deportation took place . During her stay at Lublin/CAMP Mrs Meyring cooperated with the Judenrat and established on a very primitive scale a kind of social service for German and Eastern Jews alike . Her esteem of the Judenrat is beyond any praise . An English translation of this testimony is not yet available . The Wiener Library is reliant on a team of volunteer translators to translate this collection of eyewitness testimonies from the 1950s . If you are highly competent in written German and English and would like to help in this regard please contact our Volunteer Coordinator at translation@wienerlibrary.co.uk . Click here to read more about this project . Work as a Jewess My world lay in ruins ! I was no longer a person like others . How could I comprehend it I who in tireless work for almost 20 years had worked with other women led and trained them to civic thinking steeped in the same ideas the same ideals and most fervent love of the Fatherland ! How I was bound up with every paving stone of my home town Stettin/GPE now Szczecin/LOC in Poland/GPE where suddenly I had changed from a respected figure into nothing but an unwelcome guest ! What use to me are the many testimonies of friendship ? I still had to comfort the others protect them from compromising themselves through their friendly concern about me ! And my husband understood from the whole situation only that I was distressed because one had taken my beloved work away from me and considered everything a nightmare which would pass as it had come . He went out unconcerned alas now no longer with his faithful companion the dog who had just died . For what should we have done after the forced surrender of our home despite the existing lease as subtenants with a big dog ? My husband was a well known figure on the street scene . He had been born in the same town and everyone was nice to the old man . He did not notice either how many avoided greeting us or how many did it ostentatiously which affected me almost as painfully by its emphasis . I was on the brink of suicide and only the thought that I could perhaps still be of use to my family children through my connections kept me going . In reality I was able to do nothing to achieve their rescue . They owe everything to their capable mothers . The need to use my talents productively tore me from my unaccustomed and fruitless introspection . Our material circumstances were difficult . The printing works was admittedly in view of the fact that my two brothers had been frontline soldiers boycotted more slowly as it had worked however primarily for public authorities and official organs it was not long until it was completely paralysed . My husband had lost his money in part during the war and the remainder during the period of inflation and it became more and more difficult after moving out of the business to pay him the agreed pension . So it became necessary for me to do something in order to be able to pay for our living expenses at least partially . That began when I accepted the offer of an acquaintance to make available a varying number of dresses with which I set up a small ‘ salon in my home . When I sent my business card it was a minor sensation to see the former Frau Stadträtin woman councillor in this way . That did not matter much to me . I have inherited the great gift from my parents of accepting every situation in which I find myself ‘ and to make the best of it as the English say . I had always been interested in fashionable things and could advise my customers well . In the end however the sender earned more from the business than I and as my customers liked to converse on this occasion at length and exhaustively about every problem I therefore got behind with the household duties which I now had to carry out alone which to me in any case caused significantly more difficulties than selling dresses . I was therefore very happy when the Jüdische Gemeinde Jewish community came to me with the task of organising their Winterhilfe winter relief for a small salary the first income from social activity my very own field of work . Poor Jews were now no longer permitted to be by the Winterhilfe that I the Jewess had brought into being which had been taken out of the hands of the women associations and placed under the control of the municipality . I immersed myself in the familiar work which I performed until I was appointed firstly secretary and after six months manager in the Auswanderungsberatungsstelle emigration advice centre of the Reichsvertretung der Juden in Deutschland Reich Representation of Jews in Germany/GPE later became Reichsvereinigung der Juden in Deutschland Reich Association of Jews in with a salary with which I could pay for a modest way of life and to my satisfaction became independent as a result . – On the basis of my geographical knowledge I probably would not have been eligible to take up such a position . What had my generation ever learned in geography and this narrow fount of memory had become even narrower with time . But my knowledge quickly broadened in an unimaginable way . There was barely a place on the earth which the Jews did not strive to reach in the year 1937 in order to escape the discrimination in their Fatherland/LOC . Only a few people among them my husband still hoped that this persecution would be reduced to an absurdity . And the year 1938 arrived with the arrest of almost all the men and departure to the concentration camp . Much will be written about this time by a respected authority . Here only a small segment from the experiences of a provincial advice centre can be given . On the morning of the catastrophic 9th November my cleaner came we were no longer permitted to keep a domestic servant due to the moral threat although my husband was already over 70 years old and reported the burning of the synagogue . Immediately afterwards I received a telephone call from my friend with the request to come to her on the way to the office . There I learned of the inexplicable arrest of the husband however the thought was not far from either of us women that there could be a connection here to the fire . On the street we went up to the female employees from my office the male workers had already been arrested and they told me that the office had been closed by the Gestapo Geheime Staatspolizei secret state police and one was now looking for me . They pointed to 2 men who were approaching us on the same road . At this I went up to them both and said I just heard that you want to speak to me . What do you want with me ? The men appeared surprised by the bold speech . I received the reply We must close your office and want to have your key . I responded that the outright closure was not feasible at all as I was expecting important post for emigration . One said to me that I would have to wait for some days and could then enquire from the Gestapo whether I may continue to work . Depressed I went home . There little by little many women that I knew arrived for whose family emigration I was working even my young sister in law so that I was soon receiving a picture that mass arrests had been made . Also telephone calls for help from the province . We are alone what should we do help us ! The women conduct was admirable which later even the Gestapo case worker recognised in a private conversation . I groped at first completely in the dark for the steps which were to be taken and from the Zentrale headquarters in no instructions were received as I had not received the post . For three days the stream of visitors did not stop in our home where my husband and I endlessly tried to give strength with wine and tea . At last I felt that the time had come to visit the Gestapo . I did indeed receive permission to work again and discovered my office in a tidy state . My conduct at the meeting with the Gestapo was very useful to me for future work . I had to compile lists of those men for whom an emigration plan had been secured and hand them over during a personal consultation received also the promise that old men should be released on principle a special arrangement with the Gestapo post responsible for my Bezirk/LOC district the others only followed much later . A tireless work began and whenever from my Bezirk/LOC comparatively very many releases followed very soon then it was not only thanks to the relentless work of all the colleagues in the office but not least to the capability of the wives who by means of imploring telegrams to relatives and friends throughout the entire world conjured up emigration opportunities which would otherwise not have been available . My sister in law went herself to the Kriegsministerium Ministry of War and informed the former commander of the regiment in which my brother had fought as an officer in the World War of his arrest with the result that my brother was immediately released without proof of an emigration . Even the Vorsteher board members of the Gemeinde community were released again after a short time on condition they admitted a Jewish representative of the Gestapo not only onto the Vorstand board but even to submit to his measures . With that dawned a difficult gruelling time for me at war against this inscrutable man who got his hands on all the organisations with the exception of my emigration advice centre . However the freedom of action which I retained cost much strength much effort of nerves and diplomacy . A final remnant of respect a distant echo of my earlier position in which this ‘ Bevollmächtigter person in power had already known me seemed however to protect me . In my office work was done with the greatest dedication by all the staff from whom the voluntary workers were indistinguishable . As the consultation hours were always heavily attended and I concerned myself with making as much time as the mental state of the present case required it was never possible to put the post for the Zentrale into the postbox before 11 in the evening . Each one of us knew that a rapid settlement was necessary in the interests of the people entrusted to us as the countries regulations were constantly changing therefore there could not be a day delay . Every evening my husband appeared in the office sat patiently with us his supper a quickly prepared cup of tea and joined in the sending of the enormous post because he too wanted to do his share of the work . Almost every week I went to the Zentrale in order to support the ongoing applications as much as possible through personal consultation . The work there was done under enormous high tension . It was one of the responsibilities of the Zentrale to allocate the foreign currency which would be made available from the Joint American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee J.D.C. for the payment of the passages and starting out money between the different cases . However neither foreign currency nor space on ships were available to the extent which would satisfy the demand from the different advice centres of the Land region and so the decision of the Zentrale became a verdict which not only the people concerned but also we organisers who were wholeheartedly involved with our ‘ Fälle cases faced with agitation . The mood of the wives towards our work became more and more unfavourable the longer it took until their relatives could be freed . When the first men were released from the concentration camp it was upsetting to see how all the women ungrudgingly shared in the joy of the others . But already by the third phase one noticed that a depression gained ground which later often made itself heard in allegations about ... unjust treatment . It was so very understandable it still hurt so much in the awareness of the efforts made or of the impossibility of success if there were no opportunities to emigrate for the people concerned and also the conditions for admission into the English camp could not be fulfilled . I knew how difficult it was quite particularly for the women in the small towns who were left there completely without protection and support exposed as vulnerable to caprice . One allowed oneself also many a special joke at small towns . Thus I remember the agitated call from a small provincial town where one had taken and imprisoned not only the men but also the children in order to then give them back in the evening to the distraught mothers . In another town one took women and children from their beds and put them ... dressed only in a shirt opposite the synagogue so that they might watch the fire while the men were marched off as the guilty ones . The contact with the brave and capable women of the province has been a great experience for me . My Bezirk/LOC where I gave advice was very extensive and so I relocated some of the increasingly frequent consultation sessions to the smaller towns . Thus I obtained an insight into the life of the small town woman which filled me with great admiration . The combination of the tasks of housewife businesswoman and mother was no problem for them . Also I had the opportunity to observe how respected almost everywhere the Jews were and the way they had been assimilated . As my relationship towards my clientele was not of a bureaucratic nature but my concern for their worries and tribulations became mostly deeply felt so I managed in the often negative nature of my endeavours to be at least an emotional support for them . In the whole of my social work until now there has been nothing so depressing as to have to receive the answer that no possibility of emigration can be found . One should not fail to recognise that it was no advantage for the sought after countries to take in the people stripped of all assets . Much would have perhaps happened differently if one had been permitted at an early stage to take advances from the large resources from America/GPE made available through the Joint as a small initial capital so that the emigrants did not have to settle as beggars . But no situation was more horrible and dreadful than when after all the formalities had been completed everyone had upped sticks and the people were ready to travel the country conditions suddenly changed and the barriers closed . The Jews have really not experienced much global awareness . It must remain an object of ... special consideration to an insider to show how the lack of understanding of all countries has contributed to the fact that the disaster that has befallen the Jews was able to assume such proportions . I am almost convinced that the world has deprived itself of the most valuable strengths which would have been qualified to build further on the culture ladder which as we have now seen with astonishment has been climbed until now only by a small section of humanity . The Deportation 1940 Into this exhausting gruelling work February 1940 broke like a thunderclap with its unexpected ‘ Auswanderung emigration of all the members of the Gemeinde . Previously the order had been given but on the intervention of the Reichsvereinigung der Juden and appeal by the Städtisches Gesundheitsamt Municipal Department of Public Health later rescinded that those Jews who lived in the best quarters of the town had to vacate their homes and had to move into a department store which was standing empty and had formerly been in Jewish hands . The Gestapo had marked out the area with chalk which was to be available to the families and which generously allowed the installation of a bed of a cupboard as a dividing wall from the neighbour and of a carpet as a curtain . Even the Oberbürgermeister city mayor had protested against the accumulation of the Jews in the shopping district and so this chalice passed us by . Neither was there any lack of warning voices which some Provinzvertreter provincial representatives relayed to me and which coming from ‘ sachverständige expert mouths indicated an imminent evacuation of the Jews from the Grenzbezirk border district . The Gestapo Jewish Vertrauensmann representative had already asked me months ago whether I was ready to organise with him the placement of Jews in Lublin/CAMP . I had invariably reported these remarks to the Zentrale but received the reassuring reply that indeed deportation plans had been made but an acute danger did not exist at that time . There were two factors which we had not taken into account the change in the Gestapo Judenreferat Jewish in Berlin/GPE which took place in January through the appointment of the feared Viennese ‘ Austreiber Eichmann Eichmann the and the burning ambition of our Gauleiter Nazi party regional leader Schwede who wanted to make his province the first to be judenrein/LOC free of Jews just as he had also already succeeded in establishing his Wahlkreis/LOC electoral district Coburg/GPEas the first to be Nazi . Although I am reluctant to talk about my own experiences about which until now I have only spoken out to a very small extent even to my friends I have to do it in order to be able to give a picture of the events . There will only be a few survivors who are in the position to do this and who have obtained such great insight not only into the life of the deportees but also into that of the Polish Jews . But everything that I described concerns only the year 1940 supplemented by reports made possible some time later by my brother and other friends from there . Certainly our deportation was something terrible and certainly my fellow countrymen have had to suffer badly and yet the ambush in which we were caught seems to me to have been easier to bear than the waiting for the inevitable fate and the apprehension of the conditions awaiting them to which the later deportees were condemned . My husband and I had had to give up our home very suddenly because the Bürgermeister mayor who had moved into the same house considered it unbearable after moving into the house to live with Jews . A female acquaintance let us have 2 back rooms of her large apartment and we had gone early to bed and had already been asleep for a long time when I was suddenly awoken by the sound of the doors opening . A tall man stood there in a yellow uniform who said to me Go back to sleep . I did not know that anyone was still living back here ! Of course I did not go back to sleep but decided after a brief hesitation to check what was happening at the front of the apartment . At the end of the long corridor all the doors were open . I saw at my hostess 2 uniformed men leafing through documents likewise at a married couple living at the front and now believed that it concerned a tax inspection . At all events I went in and asked whether one needed me . No one did not need me . I lay down again in my bed of course did not wake my husband and was strung to breaking point with anxiety about what was happening to my fellow residents . I do not know how much time had passed when the bedroom door was opened again and now 2 uniformed men appeared . Get up immediately . You must leave . I woke my husband who hard of hearing and also sleepy could not grasp what I wanted from him at all . Then one officer said to him Listen to what your wife is telling you you must get up immediately and leave . turned to me Get your husband warmly dressed 2 3 sets of warm underwear . It is cold where you are going . Where are we going ? That I do not know . In the presence of the two officers we had to get dressed . Pack the essentials . Bedding towels ? Not necessary you will find all that . And then he handed me a long questionnaire on information about financial standing and possible debts . Then all the money in the house and the costume jewellery which was still there – gold and silver items had already been seized – had to be handed over . Everything was put by the officers into a bag . All the food which was in the dining room had to be passed across and was taken away in baskets by the Volkswohlfahrt Nationalsozialistische Volkswohlfahrt NSV National Socialist People Welfare Nazi welfare All the keys to the cupboards had to be handed over . Then I received 2 primitive cardboard labels with the instruction to put our names on them and to hang them around our necks . My husband had until then watched everything with me in silence . Now however he shouted out indignantly No I will not do that . I am not a criminal . I watched as the two officers turned away with embarrassment . You are not a thief and nobody will think it of you . But all Jews have to wear it . Look I tying it around myself and making nothing of it ! When my husband saw that I was hanging the little sign around myself he staggered so that I had to support him . I did not understand unfortunately that at that moment he had had a shock which brought with it a mental confusion which was only apparent later . From now on he allowed everything to happen to him followed without objection . Only when the officer sealed the door did he ask And what will happen to the canary ? And the officer who was obviously very ashamed of what had happened answered We are taking it to the Tierschutzverein society for the protection of animals . He took my husband suitcase and remained at his side until we arrived for embarkation onto the train . In front of the house stood a large omnibus . We were the last to get on . It later became apparent that one had at first forgotten us . Because of this I only had 2 hours left to pack and to deal with the formalities while the officers had already appeared hours earlier at the homes of the others and checked . It had been 2 in the morning when we were taken . Deep darkness lay on the streets and although I thought I knew my home town well it was not possible for me to tell where we were going . At last we arrived in front of a big goods shed and saw scores of waiting Jews behind whom we lined up . It was a bitterly cold morning . How long we had to wait for admittance I do not know . One has in such situations no sense of time . It was already daybreak when my husband and I entered the hall which was crowded with waiting people who had been perched there on their suitcases for knows how long in dull misery . However one observed in particular in the people from the small provincial towns a certain relief when we appeared . Later I learned that we were a deportation of people among them were roughly 100 children and young people . We now had to pass various tables . At one of them the accompanying officer took away the bag in which were the jewellery and the cash that had been taken away from us . In exchange 20 Zloty equivalent to 10 Marks was handed out to us . I saw that in front of the Kontrollbeamter inspecting officer lay those forms that we had had to fill in back in January on the order of the Gestapo Vertrauensmann for the Gemeinde . Also the emigration intentions had had to be declared and I was already able at that time to state that an application to go to Sweden/GPE had been made . At a nearby table we received a ticket . The Gestapo had allowed the joke to cost them something and handed out special tickets with a nonexistent destination . Then we were separated for a body search . When I entered the small room I saw that some of the Kontrollantinnen female inspectors had once been employed by me as welfare workers in my former post . A painful silence spread around the room . Then I proudly stepped forward . Please ? Shyly one of them fumbled with my jacket . At the border it will be worse she said anxiously in a soft voice . Now our paper bags waited as tall as a man which it was not possible to carry at all . On the bottom of them lay 2 or 3 ? loaves 1 Fleischwurst meat sausage 1 tin of condensed milk 1 small cheese 1 tin of jam . In itself therefore no large parcel for which one needed such an enormous bag from the cement factory . But also with this the Gestapo had wanted to have a joke . How we had to struggle in one hand the suitcase and the other hand dragging behind the extremely difficult to handle bag over the arms blankets and coats we should be photographed for the newspapers The food the Jews take with them . Now we went to the waiting trains . It was no cattle truck as was frequently said but 4th class carriages which had been withdrawn from service so that even a lavatory was available . The doors were closed windows were not permitted to be opened something that during the 3 days and nights through which we now travelled nerve rackingly slowly was not complied with however . We also needed the snow which was heaped on the window panes to quench our thirst after the little can of milk was quickly emptied . No one had any idea how long the provisions had to last and so they were quickly consumed by many . But one helped each other out . The awareness that what belonged to one now also belonged to the others dawned only slowly and on many unfortunately never . My sister who was travelling in the same carriage as us was quicker to realise it than I. That my supplies were to be shared was self evident to me and I also had too much inner turmoil to be able to make any use of bread . But that my mug and plate which I had taken with me just in case were claimed by her as common property seemed to me in an unacknowledged way highly remarkable and displeasing . I later learned to be thankful if any mug at all was available for a large number of people . The of the people was in general admirable . No complaints . Everyone trusted that we would come to a Polish town and until the end of the war have to live there ‘ irgendwo somewhere . Undoubtedly the fact that rich and poor high and low indeed the whole Gemeindevorstand Jewish community council were among the deportees with the exception of course of the Vertrauensmann who was probably still indispensible had a calming psychological effect . I have also often had the opportunity to observe how one own conduct is strengthened through common experience how one is embarrassed in the midst of the same need to allow complaints to be made . But one should not believe that the common fate testifies to altruists . I have often had to note with concern how crass egotism forges ahead especially with such people who were the Have nots . Indeed anyone who behaved always in the most unassuming way was someone who previously had been something and was also most understanding that not everything was to be accepted as a matter of course that the Polish hosts with their often weak strength did for them and their fellow countrymen ready to help without concern for their own safety willingly took upon themselves to arrange for them . The train stopped from time to time at unrecognisable stations . Then spotlights shone into the windows and everyone held their breath in fear . Frequently we also stopped for a long time on open stretches . The hardest thing was that the carriages were not heated or lit . But with the darkness a blessed drowsiness descended on the exhausted people . But for me it then began to become very terrible for my husband had panic attacks . He was delirious believed himself in the grip of an octopus wanted to climb into the luggage net and pulled my arms and those of my sister who was helping me almost out of their sockets whenever we wanted to restrain and calm him . During none of the 3 nights was he aware of my presence . He spoke with me as with a stranger about us both and I could have been happy about all the love that he spoke about me if the situation had not been so appallingly sad . If he appeared clearer during the day I told him that we were on a convalescent trip a lovely hotel was waiting for us and we would spend wonderful days just for ourselves without my having to go out to work . It was also possible to feed him something to eat . But at night he tormented me when trying to make him go to bed . He would not stay in his place and wandered around the carriage disruptively frightening our poor fellow passengers . But nobody complained about it . Everyone understood the great and exceptional suffering that was manifesting itself there . During the third night my husband insisted on getting undressed himself . He had just taken off his boots when the train stopped once more . But now the doors were torn open men in black uniforms stormed in and drove us threatening with their bayonet outside . I was not able to pull his boots back on . He slipped into his galoshes hurried along by the men in uniform . I bundled together suitcases and blankets and clambered with my husband onto the platform on which the destination read ‘ Lublin/CAMP . The station clock pointed to 4 . In Poland/GPE We were instructed to line up and leave our luggage on the station . We did it trustingly and have never seen the suitcases again . When we came out of the station a biting cold confronted us . It must have been Réaumur 12 5 ° The station steps were icy . Many people including my husband in his loosely fitting galoshes slid out onto the streets . Already a uniformed youth with raised bayonet was standing behind him . Leave it ! ? I shouted at him in my agitation and he went on . Others have been treated worse there must already have been mistreatment there . Only very much later did I understand that one needed only to shout at these dear Volksdeutsche ‘ ethnic Germans born outside newly discovered in Poland/GPE put in uniform and given custody of the Jews in order to make them submit . Unfortunately the Polish Jews have had such respect mixed with fear for them that these stupid boys illiterates had become too big for their boots and had developed into real tormentors . Now they have since been sent into the field as ‘ Freiwillige volunteers and there will be not be many of them left . The start of our troop had meanwhile turned the corner and one heard gunfire . Not only I will have been convinced that we were to be shot . But like me many will have felt an absolute indifference towards it . Three days and nights spent under such conditions with almost no sleep numb the mind . We went now along a as it seemed never ending country road in deep snow . On both sides of the illuminated road at short intervals the young black uniformed men were standing and gleefully firing salvos into the air . Occasionally also a whip lashed out at somebody or other who was not standing sufficiently in the line . Four times I caught a whiplash which was meant for my husband and did not hurt me very much as I had also put on my fur coat over a fur lined coat . In such cold everything I was carrying fell slowly from my hand . It did not matter to me at all . My poor husband was holding a boot desperately in his hand which sadly froze as a result . The most terrible thing was that he lost first one and then the other of his galoshes and had to cover this long snowy road in stockinged feet for the most part because one prevented us from bending down to pick up the shoes . No complaint crossed his lips . He the spoiled hypochondriac that a mosquito bite could send into a fury he has neither on this road not in the following period of suffering uttered one word of complaint . Had a benevolent darkness caught hold of his senses so that he did not feel pain and cold ? It was terrible to hear the cries of misery of the old people who sank down exhausted on the road . In our deportation were the inhabitants of two old people homes people over the age of 80 . They called for help and one had to leave them lying by the side of the road . One was not permitted to stop one could not help . Suddenly a child hand snuggled into mine . Tante Aunt take me with you . The mother a youngish woman appeared to me with her tangled frost covered hair hanging down like an old witch . She had no more strength in her stiffened hands to hold onto her child . The last blanket slid from my arm as I took hold of the trusting little hand . And so the faltering man on one side the child holding my hand we came finally to a barracks camp surrounded by a fence . We were most probably among the last . When we came in the spaces were already crammed full . Everyone lay exhausted on the ground which was partially covered with straw . No heating but the presence of so many people generated a pleasant warmth after the march through the bitter cold . Here I suddenly met my eldest brother who I had hoped had avoided deportation as he had in his pocket the request from his wife who had gone on ahead to the U.S.A./GPE in order to win back her American citizenship . His three children were also already in the U.S.A/GPE .. We silently shook hands then he went on in order to help some old people . Also I discovered my father brother with his wife near me . Although almost years old he had despite the gruelling journey immediately made his medical knowledge available . We had 6 doctors among us who were urgently needed for there lay dead dying women giving birth exhausted people all mixed up . Also my sister a sick woman herself formerly a very valued Red Cross sister who during the nights of the journey had so bravely supported me therefore had also hardly slept set to work immediately . The former head of the funeral service almost 70 years old took on the task with some men of carrying out the dead among them unidentified bodies . I was primarily concerned with calming my husband . But he refused to sit on the ground . He wanted to have ‘ ordentliches Unterkommen proper accommodation . Then suddenly an Obersturmbannführer ‘ SS rank equivalent to lieutenant colonel in the German army also used by Sturmabteilung SA came up looked around and then came up to me standing beside my husband now completely collapsed . What is wrong with your husband ? He has collapsed . He looked me in the face . I have nothing to do with all that . I am the right hand of the Generalgouvernör Governor and happened to be in Lublin/CAMP . I wanted to see things for myself . I hate you ... of course . But I am a human being . I want to help you . Your husband must go into hospital into the Jewish hospital . And I am going with him . You can not go with him it is better for both of you . He fetched a young Volksdeutscher pointed to my husband and said Take this man to the Jewish hospital and let his wife know afterwards that you have handed him over . He went away my husband was fortunately not taken away . Who knows what they would have done to him . Sometime later the Obersturmbannführer came back with the Lagerkommandant camp commandant in SS uniform bowed slightly and said One has just made it clear to me that an Obersturmbannführer has nothing to do with Jews . I can not help you . Suddenly the happy news spread that the Judenrat one of the Jewish councils established by the Germans during World War would send tea . And it arrived by the bucketful but there was not enough for the multitude . So at first only the sick and weak were permitted to have any and I do not forget the looks which pleadingly followed me when I dispensing it had to pass thirsty and yearning people . But we were permitted to take for ourselves some of the pure snow which lay in heaps piled up in front of the camp . I myself felt neither hunger nor thirst . I had hardly taken any nourishment at all for some days or rather needed to . And then when later a good meal was given to me my stomach which was not used to it could keep nothing down for days . Then came a new cry the transport will be divided into 3 groups Everyone tried to stay with their relatives and friends . My next of kin and I had no thought at all of attempting such a thing . Without discussing it amongst ourselves each one was ready for his part to support the helpless people borne by his own strength . In fact from then on each member of our family became in the various places we stayed completely as a matter of course a support for the others to whom one clung with all the cares and tribulations . Only later did I learn the meaning of the division into 3 groups . In the first group were the eldest which my husband and I also joined essentially the residents of the old people homes who were sent to a small village near Lublin/CAMP in view of the proximity of the Lublin/CAMP hospital . The next group went to a larger village in the country which was reached by sledge in 3 hours . And the third group comprised the younger people rather was supposed to comprise them who had to cover on foot a road to the camp which by sledge also took 3 hours . In all 3 villages lived Polish Jews . It was a bright clear frosty afternoon when we were loaded or rather pushed onto the sledges . Our barracks had to be vacated for Jewish soldiers some of whom could already be seen . They were so I heard later released in the evening and sent out into the street in their shirts . It was for the ‘ Judenrat to supply their clothes . Our sledges were wooden boxes on runners on or in which one had to huddle up . Our group was supposed to travel for half an hour to our destination . We quickly came out of the village were surprised at the many Jewish staff that we met as we naively thought that every Jew who wore an armband with the Star of David was an employee of the Judenrat which incidentally on leaving the camp put in another appearance to us . It had become alarmed and had already picked up the people who had collapsed off the country road and taken them to the hospital . In half an hour we should be at our destination . We had already been travelling for many half hours . The fields lay covered in snow on both sides of the road . Snow snow a never ending snow covered plain . At last we arrived in a village . We were about to climb out of the sledges when black uniformed men appeared and ordered Get back in drive on ! And a man in uniform now also got onto each driver box and we travelled onward into the dying day . Snow snow nothing but snow . How much longer we drove I do not know . Then we arrived again in a village that lay there as if deserted . Get out . And anyone who did not get out quickly enough was helped by a bayonet from behind . And again the effect of my angry cry Leave the sick man when one wanted to push my husband out . Quite suddenly the sledges disappeared and we were standing alone on the village street which was illuminated by the bright snow . My husband started to become delirious again . Let me go to bed . I am so tired . My strength almost failed in preventing him from lying in the snow . Then I saw the priest come out of the nearby church accompanied by a man . I went up to him and spoke to him in French . I asked for shelter for my sick husband and help for the old people who had come with me . He replied that we should wait for him here he would come back soon . A ray of hope ! After a considerable time he stood before us again . The sick man with his wife and the doctor with his wife come with me . The others go quietly into the houses where one will take you in . We followed him into his kitchen . Pleasant warmth enfolded us . He told me to rub my husband hands and feet with snow which very swollen were stuck in the shoes and the doctor who accompanied us had with him a hypodermic syringe and heart medication for his own use which he now gave to my husband . Round the big kitchen stove straw had been spread out we settled ourselves down on it after we had been given hot tea . It did not just remain we four however as yet others had found the way to the priest house and although the priest had said to us that he did not want to accommodate more than 4 people we could not turn our fellow countrymen away . Everyone fell into a deep sleep . Then my husband started to become delirious again and to call for help . His voice rang out through the sleeping house . In vain we tried to calm him . I took him like a child into my arms but in his delusion he did not recognise me . The doctor thought it was right to go to the priest and give him an explanation for what was happening to us . The result of that was that we were locked in with the urgent advice to move on the following morning . However for us things had been working out and help was nearby . I later discovered more details . The black devils had acted on their own authority and taken us contrary to the order to a Polish village . There the leader had gone to the Ortsversteher village mayor with the announcement I bring Jews . What am I supposed to do with them ? Kill them . The Polish village mayor contacted the Judenrat in Lublin/CAMP and received the assurance that the following day sledges would be sent in order to take the deportees to their destination . The local Polish population had behaved in a thoroughly decent way towards us . Everyone had found somewhere to spend the night and the teacher had ensured that a hot lunchtime soup would be provided for us for a small cost . Even my husband who again and again fell back to sleep greedily slurped the soup was not to be moved however or stand up when the sledges came so that we almost missed the connection . I did not know that it was an overwhelming weakness which held him back . Finally 2 young Poles were prepared at my request to carry him out for a reward . We lay him in the sledge as far as the other occupants could make room and in the absence of the lost blanket I covered him with his Ulster which he had brought with him as well as his fur coat . When I wanted to fetch my coat from the house it had been stolen with the muff and gloves and a derisive laughter rang out after me when I hurried back to the sledge because there was no more time left for me to look for them . And in the short interval the two young Poles had stolen the Ulster covering my husband . So I travelled bent over my husband half kneeling half lying in order to give him shelter from the cold and it will remain for me an eternal miracle that my ruined hands with which I now had to hold onto the edge of the sledge without gloves did not get frostbite . We travelled through the forest and it was not long before we came to a village stopped in front of a little single storey house and were greeted with a wild shout by a young lad . Before I knew what was happening one had lifted my husband out and carried him into the house . I followed as quickly as I could and I found him already carefully laid on straw in a large room . E Mann mit nem Bort aus Deitschland ! A man with a beard from Germany/GPE . My husband had a white goatee which delighted the Jews with whom we had ended up for they saw in the style of the beard a sign of religiousness . All the time new people were arriving mostly women and children and staring at my husband . Helpful hands gave him tea as well as milk and food . Everyone looked after him and I did not suspect that we were in the poorest Jewish village and every gift meant deprivation for the giver . Eir Mann ? Your husband ? How old ? So olt ! So old ! How many children ? No children ? Not to echo the tone of sympathy for wealth of children is the only wealth which these poorest of the poor proudly enjoy . The large room in which we found ourselves similar to a barn was the prayer room of the Jewish village . The orthodox rabbi with his wife and 5 children lived in the same house but did not allow himself to be seen . He held himself back from us because he could not communicate with us and it was a long time before I had overcome his shyness at dealing with a woman and learned to appreciate him in joint work to provide care . He was a young man a Polish Jewish beauty with such good manners as if he had not been brought up in a miserable Jewish village but out in the wide world who had obviously taken over the running of the relief operation . He initiated night watches and stayed watching with us himself . My request for water for washing embarrassed him . Eventually he brought in a small cup of water told me to reach out my hands and wet them . He was obviously not used to greater cleaning . I dared to ask him for a bed for my husband . Forgive me there is no bed he replied with embarrassment visibly anxious to speak hochdeutsch High German standard German . But the following morning after we had been revived with tea there was no food he came to me and said Mei Vader is a frummer Mann . Er mecht gern haben den Mann mit dem Bort . Kimmt mit . My father is a religious man . He would like to have the man with the beard . Come with me . We supported my husband along the short road and so for the first time entered the miserable dwelling of a Polish Jew . Through an unpaved hallway we came into a narrow one windowed room . Right in the corner against the smoke stained wall stood the square brick built stove . The woman of the house did not move from her spot . All the time she stirred the soup which with some dry bread constitutes the food for the day and which is shared out between the numerous family at no particular time but one is in the habit of eating when the person concerned hingert is hungry . While our housewife was wielding the cooking spoon with one hand so that the thin watery soup did not stick she held the prayer book with the other hand . All the time that I was in the room with her she did not put the book down and from her lips I saw that she was engrossed in the contents . She did not greet us pointed us with a movement of her head to the beds which stood with a narrow space between them near the window . In one of the beds that did not have very clean linen I did not know then what great possessions bed linen and a bed are my husband had been laid . The woman now came up and without speaking gave me a velvet pouch . I knew that the religious Jews kept their tefillin in such pouches but I was at a loss to know what to do with it . So I laid it hesitantly next to my husband who had immediately fallen asleep again . Then such a contemptuous expression passed across the silent woman face that I felt deeply humiliated by how greatly I had disappointed her because she had granted her help to unworthy people . She went back to the stove and took no more notice of us at all . I dared not ask her for some soup for my husband . However when the son our young protector came in he gave my silent husband a glass of that indefinable soup which from then on became the habitual meal for my fellow countrymen . The Jews in the small villages are very orthodox and do not permit the consumption of meat that is not kosher . And such meat was scarce and when found then only with great sacrifices therefore the ingredients of the soup are vegetables of which there are hardly any in winter cooked in a lot of water . Of course one also used flour and semolina where these milled products are to be had . No wonder that the bodies of my fellow countrymen who were not used to a diet so low in fat lost on average15 kg . in the first 3 months . It was possible later through the representatives of the Joint in Warsaw/GPE the JEAS Jewish Emigrant Aid to improve the food somewhat . But however often I tried to discuss the question of meat it was pointed out to me that the question was not open to debate . In the meantime the doctor and the helpful fellow countryman who had taken care of the burials had been able to travel to Lublin/CAMP and had managed to have my husband admitted into the hospital there . We went there on the very same day . I was very worried that my husband would not stay without me in the hospital but he was much too weak to understand what was happening to him . Not even the fact that that he had been laid on a stretcher for want of a bed and that it was not possible after 5 days to get undressed and change his clothes to say nothing of getting washed penetrated his consciousness . In the ward where my husband had been taken there were already many fellow countrymen a few in beds most on straw men and women mixed up together . They were as I later discovered those unfortunate people who had been left behind on the country road when we arrived in the village found by the alerted Judenrat and almost all had been taken to hospital with severe frostbite . They were all shocked about the primitive conditions of admittance and even I could scarcely disguise my astonishment at the conditions that I found there . I had during my work as Stadtrat city councillor collaborated very intensively with the healthcare services and gained a deep insight into the question of hospitals . What I have seen here struck everyone like a slap in the face given what we understood by the concept of hygiene . Admittedly the room was large and bright if also very overcrowded . There was also a washbasin with running water that did not run however and a tiled stove which was only lit at noon after long efforts by an old man with damp wood and gave out some heat towards evening . But there was no bed linen no towel no soap no glass . A single enamel cup served the whole ward of 20 people . Nobody was washed nobody undressed . A single bedpan no bottle a single catheter were available . One sister struggled using girls brought in off the street with the care of the sick which essentially consisted of the distribution of the meagre food . There was in the morning a thin coffee and two dry slices of bread at noon alternately boiled black carrots and mashed potato not freshly made or beetroot with mashed potato and in the evening a cup of tea with dry white bread . Only the doctor admitting the patients was wonderful in his warm humanity . Only later when I was on familiar terms with the doctors and staff did I learn that this was also for them an unusual and unbearable state into which they had been forced by the occupation . The following had taken place the small Jewish hospital with a ground floor and one storey was if I remember correctly equipped for 120 people . It had sufficient and qualified Spezialärzte specialist doctors and equipment a well trained Oberschwester matron and less well trained but several Hilfsschwestern auxiliary nurses . Shortly before we came a spotted fever epidemic had come to an end and there was still much material being disinfected also some wards were closed when 30 bedsteads with all the supplies of beds and linen a lot of medication dressings and above all modern instruments were seized by the German military . At the objection as to how was one supposed to accommodate the sick came the short reply Jews need no beds . They can sleep on the floor . Immediately after this came our invasion which in the first weeks amounted to up to 80 people per day so that we turned the whole running of the hospital on its head and local patients could not be admitted quickly enough . When one knows all this one can not be sufficiently grateful for the fact that the doctors did not refuse to grant at least refuge under their surveillance . More was in many cases not necessary for the deportees who were now flooding back from the three villages . In the following months it was possible to improve these conditions as admission into hospital was placed under strict medical supervision . Nursing staff were not available for the two wards in which my fellow countrymen had been placed . I therefore timidly asked the Oberschwester whether one would allow me to assist the Stationsschwester ward sister who had taken over the principal running of our section in addition to her other duties . It was important to me to stay near my husband and it was clear that my mere presence calmed the sick . However one was at first reluctant to agree . One was obviously afraid that I would not take orders . When one saw however that I did follow orders completely did not even favour my husband when sharing out food one made use of my help increasingly . Especially with listless patients who refused to take nourishment . Thus I remember one of our most well bred women who lay apparently unconscious in bed and did not respond to the sister . I called her by her name at which she immediately opened her eyes . You see it is I and I am bringing you something to eat . I do not want anything to eat one brings me excrement and urine . But how can you say such a thing . Here lies my husband . I am feeding first him and then you . I have promised your daughter to look after you . How many lies crossed my lips back then . It was all the same to me if in this way I could give emotional support and a peaceful I managed to give her nourishment for some days . But then she also closed her mind to me . I felt that she no longer had the will to live . She would never again see her daughter who was in a mixed marriage or her grandchildren . Why torture her ? And she fell asleep so gently as I saw many die . Also my husband who lay there almost always sleeping and did not know how badly his hands and feet were covered in blood and pus which had not been washed which had not been bandaged except with a first aid dressing which I myself had put on with a shirt I had been given and torn into strips he also died in his clothing which he had not taken off since the deportation a gentle death . And at the last moment his wife was not with him ! When I entered the ward in the morning I found the familiar face no more . I had become accustomed to see death come . Down there it had lost his terror for me . Each day when I came into the hospital the doctor reported to me who had died during the night . And my reason replied It is for the best . Amongst the difficulties in which we placed the Jews of the villages where we had been taken in were not least the fatalities . In the small village where I had been initially with my husband the annual death rate is e.g. not as high as the number of dead which we supplied already in the first quarter . The Lublin/CAMP cemetery is certainly large and the Judenrat marked out in a very far sighted way a free section for the deportees . One of the first in this foreign soil was my husband . It was not easy to find out when the funeral was to take place . But the fellow countryman who had from the early days taken care of the burials gave me the information and accompanied me to the nearby cemetery . Another young fellow countryman joined us so that I was not completely alone . I had to wait in the office for a long time until one led me to the door of a room in which on a tall block of ice my husband lay surrounded by religious Jews who were murmuring the prayers for the dead . Then I had to withdraw again . Soon a tarpaulin on poles was carried out on which lay the shrouded corpse which was carried ahead of me . Coffins were unknown there . Suddenly the bearers placed the bier down and disappeared . We waited for a while then my companions went to look for the men in order to find out why they had not returned . I stood alone beneath the grey February sky on the snow covered road and gazed at the shrouded body the shape of which was outlined . I thought I could not bear it . Then it occurred to me that my husband had wished to be cremated to Beethoven Funeral March so I sang it softly for him . The men came back and carried the bier to the grave . One was not permitted to reproach them for the delay . It had been too difficult to dig the deep grave out of the frozen earth . And then with movements they laid down the dead man who was dressed in a prayer shawl uncovered his face and hands between which they put a small post with a little sign which presumably bore his name . My heart wanted to stand still with the shock . But my husband face shone peacefully and beautifully towards me from the grave and my imagination lifted me out of the horror and let me see the royal grave of a pharaoh in which I had to leave behind the person who had loved me like no other . After me no other woman was permitted to take part in the funeral ceremonies . The senior hospital doctor who had grown up in western thinking and customs was shocked when he heard that one had allowed me to attend and I had to admit that he was correct that it was scarcely bearable for a woman . However I would not like to have been without the knowledge that I had led my husband to his final resting place . Three months later when I was no longer an unknown woman the Judenrat erected a headstone to my husband as thanks for my work with them the first in the cemetery to bear German words . A member of the Judenrat led me to the unveiling and my new found kind Polish women friends completely covered the grave with flowers contrary to the prevailing custom . The gratitude of these good people is just as boundless as their willingness to help . The Judenrat planned incidentally to inscribe on a large iron plaque the names of those buried in the Lublin/CAMP cemetery . When I now left the cemetery completely alone and thought about how easy death from is I was tempted for the first and only time . Nobody would notice if I now went out of the town and deeper and deeper into the snow . The thought of ending things was too appealing . My path led me past the hospital . There a man was standing in the entrance and gesticulating wildly with his arms . Where have you been one was looking for you Do kimmen Leit possibly You come and take charge . And I went in . One needed me . One had missed me . My ego was and remained extinguished from that day on . That was the wonderful thing that I could make myself useful and in that way my inner being remained intact . Never have I loved my name more than when it now fell in a comforted and grateful tone from the lips of those unfortunate distraught people who were transported to the hospital from the three villages where they had been allocated and were waiting full of fear on their stretcher to be admitted . When they saw me they immediately harboured the trust and hope which was in no way justified that they would now be safe . Indeed from the early days of our deportation I worked for the others . I began with the care of the sick . However soon the hospital administration asked me to take over the clerical work associated with the admission of the patients as one could not understand each other well . Each day sledges came from the three villages in which our fellow countrymen were living and brought seriously and less seriously – ill patients also those only mentally depressed who hoped to find a more humane abode in the hospital than they had with the poor village Jews . Many crowded into the escort service despite the biting cold and the gruelling road in the understandable hope of receiving some solace and other forms of relief in the town . However shocked by the atmosphere in Lublin/CAMP which was loaded with agitation and without the desired possibility of being able to properly eat one fill once again it was difficult for me to provide the frozen people merely with something warm to drink they were happy to return to their peaceful villages . At the beginning the hospital admitted everyone then however the administration refused to keep those who were not fully in need of hospital treatment and it was often feverish hungry people poorly protected from the cold who were sent back again on a 3 journey by sledge . I wrestled with the admission administration over every single one . We felt the hardship of the rejection dreadfully . If however as I did ... one took stock objectively of the situation that we were in at the hospital really almost ruined then one must admit that the administration could not behave otherwise . With time the conditions in the hospital improved so much that the physically sick were placed in the wards for the locals and in this way received another delay and nourishment unlike those who had stayed behind in the general area for whom it was not ‘ worth incurring special expense . One day the surgeon said to me that the American Red Cross had said they wanted to investigate the conditions in the hospital . He asked me to be in the hall when the visit took place he wanted to introduce me so that I had the opportunity to say a few words about our situation . But the delegation came surrounded and encircled by such a large number of gold covered uniforms that it was impossible to get near them . It was also not necessary . The leading surgeon said without particular emphasis and therefore particularly effectively These people all have injuries from frostbite . Today I have amputated the 150th finger . Material for bandages is no longer available . In addition the delegates saw the little girl who because of frostbite had had the fingers of her right hand and all of her toes amputated . The story of the little one is to have gone out that very same evening on the wireless . It was a case of a young school child who had been sent by her parents to attend school in the capital city of the province and had been deported from there with her foster mother . The visit had however had one success . After the child had been interrogated by the Gestapo on the following day at which she is thought to have shown a defiant courage the parents request was granted and permission given that when fit to travel she would be allowed to return to her parents . Probably she will have met together with them an even worse fate . In Lublin/CAMP it was what lay ahead for the whole hospital . The deportees later ended up establishing sickbays in the 3 villages in which they assembled those who had been rejected by the hospital and others who were not seriously ill . Doctors were certainly available who tenderly cared for them even though medication was of course in short supply . The hospital pharmacy kindly assisted however despite some shortage of the most essential items . For nursing more or less well trained workers came forward . My sister who at first had been requested by the Lublin/CAMP hospital later was in expert charge of a small sickbay like this and was very popular with the patients . Her rich experience from the war service now became completely invaluable . In yet another matter it was very difficult for me to defend the measures of the Judenrat . They took the view that the estate of a dead person if there were no surviving spouse was due to them to cover their expenses . They were however willing to waive this provided the proceeds of the items went not to an individual but to the village group to which the deceased belonged . Initially there was no estate at all . All kinds of riffraff saw in the confusion the possibility of theft in which a newly appointed guard unquestionably assisted . I have never again seen either my husband mink or his fur cap even though he died in them and even though I was known in the hospital . One only handed over his wedding ring to me which the doctor had sawn from his finger . That I myself had been robbed to such an extent was then however also the only thing that calmed my fellow countrymen who angrily rebelled against the decision of the Judenrat . Meanwhile I had become the representative not only of the Judenrat but also of my fellow countrymen who for a long time had been accustomed to me looking after their concerns . But I had not achieved this position of trust with the Judenrat as quickly . There was on the contrary opposition to overcome which had already started with the request for the provision of paper to use for the so urgently needed lists of people . Indeed we existed completely anonymously and it was not possible at all for the Judenrat to respond to the enquiries from Germany/GPE about the whereabouts of individuals . That now became my work beginning most primitively with the pencil found in my handbag and initially with the sacrifice of my own money for postage . Then however the Judenrat soon became accustomed to no longer reading through the incoming post but to handing it over to me to answer so that my work was legitimized . When I later reminded the Generalsekretär General Secretary of the Judenrat who became my friend of this my start he did not want to believe his hostile behaviour . But even I was not objective when I took it on about the fact that one counted off to me the 25 sheets for the lists with hidden opposition I did not yet suspect however at that time what treasure one sheet of writing paper represented . My experience gained in earlier work was based also on this begin small take the most insignificant work seriously adopt the practices and change nothing until one has control of the situation and has earned trust . And I did not lack that for long here either so that at the end of March one set up an office in from then on I advised the German speaking Jews processed their emigration plans and found the various agencies as desired by the Judenrat who did not want to attend to the affairs of the deportees for fear of the German authorities in order to make the necessary assessments . In the hospital I was no longer needed since we had found a patroness in the person of the wife of the original chief physician who like an angel spent time with the patients and also possessed sufficient authority to secure facilities for the patients . Her husband was during the Polish War with his field hospital on the Hungarian border and was interned in Hungary/GPE . The villa in Lublin/CAMP was immediately seized and the wife put out onto the street . As the doctor had a large mortgage on the hospital building the wife was given a room there and granted board and lodging . She was a wonderful human being withdrawn and brusque showed towards me however a touching inspired friendship . Unfortunately the Gestapo drove her out of the hospital because her concern for the deportees made them suspicious especially as she had given up her room to me for consultations with my fellow countrymen so that I was not standing in the cold corridor . One could however not know whether plotters and freemasons took part in these meetings in her room . She was followed again and again and had in the end no space left for herself but somewhere or other only merely a corner until she was completely lost . She had a willingness to make sacrifices which bordered on self abandonment . Her un Polish mentality made her difficult for the Lubliners to comprehend from this also resulted her fervent devotion to me as a representative of western culture . An additional duty in my office emerged which was not always easy to tackle . At first my fellow countrymen came to the consultation in order to speak out so Polish village residents soon also sought me out if they wanted to complain rightly or wrongly about my fellow countrymen so that I therefore unwillingly became the arbiter . It must be stated again and again how willing the Polish Jews were to make sacrifices when they took us in . They shared their poverty with us and they were terribly disappointed when parcels came from Germany/GPE and their guests did not consider it necessary to share with them as they did very readily with their small amount . It can unfortunately not be concealed that some of our people did not behave well . They had no concept of the people poverty . Accustomed to an organisation arranging everything they believed a failure of such a thing was to blame here without knowing that our hosts had been completely unprepared and had received the uninvited guests who had been simply thrust on them without reward from any side . How could we know that sanitation lavatories running water in the house are unknown wonders that the difficulty of fetching water encouraged lack of cleanliness and that the form of nutrition is unimaginably poor so that our demands were inevitably considered as presumption . And then it was also the case that the most demanding elements were those who at home had nothing themselves and that the most modest and most grateful were those who simply possessed not only outwardly destructible but also internal indestructible values . In any case the Polish people very soon discovered that their uninvited demanding guests were essentially German Jews who had always looked down their noses at the Polish Jews and so in many cases tensions emerged which I tried to overcome . I began as of now to organise the three villages from my office . I gave out bulletins about everything generally that I established from the authorities and former female colleagues were obliged by me to attend to the people in their groups and to help them with drawing up necessary petitions . I even took on the exchange of letters with the Berlin Zentrale and briefed them as thoroughly as I could about the situation . I was busy from early in the morning until evening and so exhausted when I came home that I could fall asleep immediately on a chair or in bed surrounded by many people talking . At home ? Where was my home ? Fate has decided about me quite particularly . I had nothing to do with the way everything happened differently from the other deportees . When I took my husband to the hospital I asked where I could spend the night . One said to me that the only possibility was in the office at the orphanage in which one would set up a bed . A friendly Polish woman led me there and the dear kind rather shy housemother kept me . A beautiful bedstead that a child gave up for me freshly made beds a towel a small piece of soap which the children were over eager to bring to me . What riches ! I needed to sleep perhaps for only just 2 weeks in my clothes when I was given a gift of a nightdress characteristically enough of the attitude of the kind giver a good nightdress made of silk . On the second day a toothbrush was arranged with someone in the hospital and needle and thread in order to at least be able to pull together the big hole in my stockings . Enviable privilege ! Never again can I now see a needle lying on the ground since I know what a priceless possession such an unremarkable thing represents . The business office even had a washbasin with running water so that I could at last thoroughly wash myself which drew my attention away from the fact that the room itself was very dirty smoky and strewn with cigarette ends . In Poland/GPE one did not like to open the windows in order to prevent the precious warmth from escaping . And in the room stood a big friendly tiled stove which was indeed cold when I came in the evenings however during the day had heated up somewhat so that I did not freeze in bed after all and I could dry my only handkerchief on it . I had the good fortune of a home where a sympathetic woman expected me in which young girls gave me hot tea and were gladly willing to give up bread and fat from their small ration . However I needed to make use of it only in the mornings as I had always taken a very good midday meal . Then oh miracle I was invited to a meal each day by a doctor and his wife who had studied in Germany/GPE lived in a modern district of town ran a modern household and showed me a touching friendship . How wonderfully life plays out . This doctor wife who later on was regarded in reports which came to me as anti social had been moved by the report which her husband brought from the hospital and had hurried with a large of sweets to the patients just as I arrived there with my husband . The odd couple attracted her attention she tried to speak to me but I had disappeared . So she came again the next day and invited me for a meal . I owe it to this woman that I was raised up from the mass and was moved into humane external conditions . Each day I came from then on to her and stayed as long as the curfew permitted . After my husband had died she said weeping Lean on us . As long as we have something so do you . Unfortunately I could not live with them as all available rooms had been confiscated . But one month later she had found accommodation for me in the neighbouring house with an Advokat lawyer and his wife the most wonderful humanitarians that one could imagine . The young wife was beautiful physically and spiritually . She became like a daughter to me . She looked after me and spoiled me . You do so much for others let us do something for you . In the bed made with the most beautiful linen I lay lice ridden for despite bathing I was not rid of the vermin as I kept catching them in the office . However I was not only worried about bringing vermin into the beautiful clean home but also spoiling the lovely blanket and linen with my ulcerating feet . Of course I too had not escaped physical injury . Right at the beginning I had caught a severe feverish bronchitis with a cough that lasted for a long time . But I could take no notice of that for firstly in the orphanage I only had a place to sleep which I had to vacate at daybreak and secondly I had to be in the hospital when the sledges came in from the surrounding area . My people who hungry and sleep deprived had undergone the hardship of the journey had to find me to talk to me . When I collapsed one day unconscious in the corridor one put me into bed . As however I had got up again during the day in order to be able to greet the people one threw me out 2 days later . I was able to save the bed for my sister whose general condition was much worse than mine . It was after all no great pleasure for me to be on the ward . There could be no thought of peaceful sleep . The Polish Jewess expresses her emotions loudly . She seems to consider stifling them shows a lack of feeling . And so one hears a constant more or less loud weeping over more or less great pain which turns into a loud howl when the patient is taken to the operating theatre . Then I would much rather be in the place where I was sleeping which I shared at the time with my sister who had been requested to go to Lublin/CAMP who for her part had a very much worse cough . If she were then I would wake her with my coughing and if I were asleep she would stifle the cough which almost came like choking fits and we both disturbed the poor harassed ever patient housemother who for incomprehensible reasons did not want to have the door between us closed . Through the filthiness of my stockings which I could not change the scratched places on my leg became dangerously inflamed and finally ulcerated . My sister insisted that I had a dressing made by the nursing auxiliary in the hospital . As he however calmly thought that the places would dry out by themselves I let the matter rest however I knew how scarce dressings were . However then astonishingly I received without special request bandages sent from Germany/GPE . However the foot and leg remained swollen so that almost until my departure 5 months therefore I could not wear any shoes . I wrapped the foot in newspaper and pulled a man rubber shoe over the top . This lady in fur coat and hat was certainly a grotesque sight already an unusual sight on the street among these people for rich and poor wear headscarves and my gammy leg in paper . Only when a doctor amongst my fellow countrymen started to work on my foot which was already nearly infected with blood poisoning was there an improvement . The concern of the doctor that the elephantine swelling could indicate heart disease found its simple solution through the realisation that the altered position of the foot through the lack of insole in the rubber shoe was the cause . But it is indicative of the absorption of working people that neither in the hospital nor in the doctor household did I find time to look after my health and that it did not occur to anyone else to pay attention to it either . We were all engaged in tireless work for others engrossed up to the ears in the tasks which were constantly piling up . The leading men of the Judenrat worked indescribably hard . I had scarcely ever met such personal sacrifice before as I also now grasped the concept of real poverty . The Judenrat is an institution established by Pilsudski a former Polish which was retained under the invaders . It is a cumbersome instrument . In Lublin/CAMP about 26 people belonged to it as I recall from whom a committee was appointed . At the head was an Advokat a not very friendly but clever and disciplined man who was certainly very suited to the daily unpleasant negotiations with the Gestapo . But his commitment alone was not always enough . Sometimes one also took pleasure in ordering the entire Judenrat to an early morning meeting and this in order to cause as much upheaval and agitation in the families as possible on the previous evening shortly before the curfew . Then one had the assembled company wait for a time outside in the cold in order to raise the tension and finally gave information which the Präsident president could just as well have received alone . Thus e.g. the request to build a barracks without announcing a specific purpose which opened the floodgates to wild rumours . Only after completion was the anxious tension lifted when the harmless purpose was revealed as the construction of workshops . Once as I was told all the members of the Gemeinde were also ordered to different squares where they had to wait bareheaded for a long time in the cold . Out of the crowd men with full beards were selected one no longer found in Lublin/CAMP as many men with religious styles of beard and assembled in a certain square . There one demanded that they made a threatening sign . One showed them the stance . That was then photographed and appeared in journals with the subtitle ‘ Jews in Lublin/CAMP threaten the police . The second Präsident a kind engineer already brought on his arrival an atmosphere of calm . He had the difficult task of procuring a workforce for the demands of the occupying authorities which increased daily . Lublin/CAMP has many qualified craftsmen with whose work the authorities were very satisfied . There was no remuneration . That as with materials accommodation etc the Judenrat had to provide . Also for many private wishes of individuals wishes which concerned for example baby clothes a doll with eyes that shut and could say Papa and Mama and such like items desired from the homeland . What made the work so difficult for the Judenrat was that no daily schedule could be arranged because new sudden demands were always being made . The gentlemen who did not belong to the committee appeared each day in the office with some concern or other of some friends and acquaintances or other ‘ Beziehung connections still played a large part in the minds of the Polish Jews hampered the members of the committee who were overburdened without this with their suggestions and reproaches when a reported matter could not be resolved and the room was buzzing with voices so that one could not understand how any work at all could be done amidst this . Often screaming women appeared in front of the house as soon as arrests had been made and demanded to know where the men had been taken which one did not know the Judenrat either . The calming influence in the office was the well trained Generalsekretär a clever level headed man who knew the mentality of the Jews well . He understood best how to achieve calm to some extent and with his talent for organisation he knew how to convert the available rooms for the many new tasks . The Judenrat had to e.g. establish its own post room ... as no Jew was still permitted to enter the post office . Each day an authorised Pole had to transport the post bags back and forth . Posters appeared on various houses in the ghetto quarter that at that time however was not a closed ghetto in the real sense to which it was only downgraded years later . This was supposed to prevent the overwhelming of the small post office . Yes the Herr Generalsekretär even managed to establish its own workroom for the harassed committee in front of which an enormous Polish Jew stood guard . This Generalsekretär who became my good friend had an excellent understanding for the treatment of the populace . Thus many a riotous assembly in front of the Gemeindehaus ‘ Jewish community was dispersed through his calm decisive Thus I remember one occasion which had assumed very threatening proportions . Yet again several hundred Jews had been arrested and taken away somewhere or other . The reason ? One had become accustomed not to ask for reasons for arrests . But here it was exceptionally well known . A Volksdeutscher had been shot in a Polish inn . At this the quarter where the street was located was closed off and all the Polish and Polish Jewish residents brought out and taken away during which the Jews had to go with their hands up to differentiate themselves from the Poles . It was explained to the Judenrat at its objection that no Jew had been present at the inn We already know that . But the house belongs to a Jew and some of the residents are Jewish . In front of the Gemeindehaus many women had already gathered who were demanding screaming that the Judenrat start making enquiries . For most of the Jewish population the Judenrat still represented the omniscient authority . Suddenly the rumour spread that a messenger had brought news to the Judenrat . The gathering outside the Gemeindehaus became bigger and bigger the behaviour of the women more and more threatening when one had them told that one could not yet give any information . Stones flew up against the windows and one announced that no member of the Judenrat would be allowed out of the door until clarification had been received . In fact a messenger had come from nearby Chelm/GPE where the former Jewish lunatic asylum had been . When the SS Schutzstaffel ‘ Defence or protection Squad established 1923 as Hitler personal guard later transformed by Heinrich Himmler into major paramilitary organisation of the Nazi however could use the house and land the inmates were simply ‘ liquidiert liquidated and Jews were brought in to improve the garden plot . The messenger had escaped one had given him the list of names of the people taken there to bring with him but in the agitation of the escape he had only brought one part of the list with him . The Judenrat realised that it was impossible for it to disclose the incomplete list because the women would not believe that those not named were still alive . Then the Generalsekretär decided to tell a necessary lie . He possessed a schedule of the arrested men and he read this standing in front of the window . He had the anticipated success . The women went home . I was invited to a meal with this clever man every Saturday much to the displeasure of my doctor wife who kept a jealous watch over my free time which belonged to her . But although I was very much indebted to her for if she had not discovered me I would surely have had to leave Lublin/CAMP after the death of my husband in order to return to the small village to which I had been assigned with my husband . Then my work for others in such a big way would never have been possible . However I was not yet willing to give up these meetings which for me were so interesting and informative . Through them I received even more insight into the Polish Jewish conditions than through conversations with my two friends the doctor and the Advokat and the same was TRUE of the Generalsekretär concerning a discussion with me who had many years of organisational experiences in communal life and especially in social work . After the meal some Jews were always then present who wanted to talk to the ‘ Deutsche Germans . The absolute trust which I had won from the Polish Jews showed itself in the way they used the Polish version of my name and no longer addressed me like other deported women . I could not have given them any greater pleasure than when I said my name e.g. on the telephone in this way . I belonged to them and they knew that they could depend on me . Amongst the constant visitors on these Saturday afternoons was also one Polish Jew who during the First World War had lived and worked in Germany/GPE for some years as a prisoner of war . He felt like an expert witness and used to underline my remarks . On one occasion I spoke about the poor education of young people about cleanliness which I had observed in the orphanage . At this he said You must indeed know in Germany/GPE cleanliness is a special matter . I lived with a Raebbe rabbi who had 5 children . They washed up to here ! He stood up and showed those present his upper body . Up to here ! None of us washes . I am no exception . The Judenrat does not wash either . And when I broke out into loud laughter he added somewhat embarrassed Perhaps the Doktor and the Advokat . But fear of water affected not only the Jews . I was told by a craftswoman who had fled from Warsaw/GPE that she had spent the night in a village with an old Polish woman who boasted that after holy baptism not a drop of water had touched her again . A tremendous respect filled me for the achievements of the men of the Judenrat for whom every working day was full of new unforeseen ad hoc tasks and who did not lose their calm demeanour . My good friend the Advokat who had chosen the supervision of the deportees and labour camps as his duties died a short time after I left . His warm heart could not bear the mental torments in the long term . He never complained only his wonderful young wife knew how he suffered . And his doctor . The latter said to me once that the Advokat after he had had to let our troop move on from Lublin/CAMP had collapsed . He owned a big beautiful home in the best part of town but he lived with his wife and child in only one room . He had placed the other rooms at the disposal of acquaintances who had been bombed out . And finally in the former dining room that served as a common room set up another bed for me . I did not know at all that I had disturbed this group through my arrival as one considerately no longer used the room . I asked them to allow me to go to bed and to continue to use the room freely around me as neither the coming and going nor the often lively discussion disturbed me in my exhausted sleep . In my former life I used to change a hotel room when the birds tweeting woke me up too early in the morning . Now the Polish chatter sounded like a lullaby to my ear . And how I had become accustomed in Germany/GPE to pay attention to every sound . A telephone ringing in the evening a knock at the door loud voices on the street could set my heart racing . Here I had become completely impervious . There also lived in the house at that time a doctor widow whose big corner house had been bombed down to the cellar and who did not stop despite the greatest financial damage thinking of others . She even gave e.g. her wedding ring away to support the deportees because she could not get to her bank account quickly enough . A brother lived with her . A former factory owner worth millions from Lodz/GHETTO whose bed was a chest on which lay a mattress and who had not left the home again since his escape because a German soldier had punched him on his first outing into Lublin/CAMP . A craftswoman from Warsaw/GPE and a landowner wife from the border with Upper/LOC Silesia/LOC also lived there . It is only just by chance that our home was not hit and that we did not have to flee said the lovely wife of the Advokat to me . So we decided to regard our home as no longer belonging only to us . Never has one allowed me to feel that I was a poor refugee and never was I conscious that I was poorer than the poorest beggar from whose figure shrouded in rags I shrank shuddering when I hurried through the beggars streets . And he was still richer than I for he had a Fatherland I however was a leaf blowing in the wind . The old ghetto quarter still existed but no one was living there . 75 % of the Jewish population used to live here and the ever more numerous offices of the Judenrat were located in this part the houses appeared mostly neglected . There was no sewerage system in this quarter of the town . Water was fetched from the well or brought by special carriers for payment . The lack of cleanliness was probably also caused by the arduous means of obtaining water and by the accumulation of people in the area which made basic cleanliness difficult . Business premises were at that time therefore some months after the defeat of Poland/GPE already being taken away in increasing numbers from the Jews and afterwards newly modernised and given a grand opening with the Jews merchandise but only for and Volksdeutsche Reichsdeutsche ‘ Germans of the Reich Nazi term for ethnic Germans living in the German state following unification in as the sign proclaimed . The traders crouch on the dirty street and keep their wares in baskets amongst which is even bread that is not bought without having been handled beforehand . The whole affair is scarcely no different at all from the customs of the East/LOC . The children hung around on the streets seeing everything hearing everything knowing everything . The approach of the dreaded ‘ Chapp Fang capture soldiers was broadcast by the children with telegraphic speed so that all the men could promptly disappear into cellars and other hiding places before they were caught by the scouts . The children no longer had any school lessons or any apprenticeships . They loitered around on the streets until the curfew forced them into the dwellings . Whenever around this time coming from the hospital I hurried to the place where I was sleeping I had the impression that rats were darting into their hiding places . Anyone who was not promptly off the streets could be prepared to be shot for this transgression . The curfew began during my time at 7 was however with the approaching spring sadistically rescheduled for 6 . Patrols convinced each other that no Jew would presume to some air on the inner courtyard . A young girl who had allowed herself to stand at an open window at 8 promptly received a shot in the head . In the new quarter in which I later had the good fortune to live the police regulations were indeed in force but there were no raids and also no ban on leaving a light on after 7 . Yet solidarity demanded that one subjected oneself to the set of rules which were in force in the ghetto quarter . On one occasion I was walking behind a young Volksdeutscher who let his whip swing as he counted to 4 . On 4 he lunged out with the whip and struck the passers by coming towards him while laughing all over his face . It was however not only the black devil the Volksdeutsche whose hand was loose and who amused themselves by frightening the Jews . To my great astonishment there were also military personnel who behaved in a completely inappropriate way . For instance many a time a young officer drove in his Jagdwagen light military jeep like through the main street which separated the new from the old quarter of the town and led to the military practice ground . Always when he was almost in front of the house in which my office was situated he fired his revolver at the hands or feet of the innocent passers by . I also had the opportunity to observe requisitioning soldiers . For instance I was just near my doctor friends when 2 soldiers of medium rank demanded entry . The household had already often been visited and the doctor had had all sorts of equipment taken away . One pushed me off into the kitchen with my fur coat so that I should be spared and the doctor wife lay down in bed into the silk cover of which her Persian lamb coat had been sewn . Through the door which was ajar I was able to observe the soldiers who were opening the doors of the sideboard and cupboard and taking out what they found in there . Only one set of cutlery was left behind for each person . Then they went cursing over the bad experience into the bedroom and tackled the linen cupboard whilst the woman of the house tried in a hysterically agitated fashion to make clear to them how often she had already been visited and produced receipts which had been issued each time . Come off it stop pretending . You are not sick I have just seen you from the hallway said one of the soldiers in a harsh tone . I had come to the front by then in order to support the woman . No it was I whom you saw I said calmly . At the sound of the German words the soldier turned round astonished . Do not be afraid I said to the weeping woman a German soldier would not harm a woman . That was perhaps not very diplomatic of me at all but I still really believed at that time in discipline and order in the German army . The soldier called his comrades back from the linen cupboard . Leave that alone he muttered . And turned to me that is just because people always lie to us so we have to check . Also the bedside tables he continued in a sterner tone they are luxury items and remain our property until we come for them . The German soldiers made good use of those kinds of luxury items for increasingly their or other women followed them with whom they wanted to make their life in dirty Lublin/CAMP more pleasant . He gave a ‘ receipt with a flourish and the two skedaddled . And the visit of the looters did not always pass off as peacefully . In the small Jewish village in which our old people lived and which in general was spared such disturbances of the peace during my time two soldiers broke into the room of a lodging and stole the furs of the old married couple . As they put up a fight they were horribly beaten . The old man who like me was still so naive as to believe in justice came to the military authorities in Lublin/CAMP . One informed him that one deplored such an offence even when it was perpetrated against Jews however that one could not find the guilty parties without further details of their regiment . And the old people were not in a position to provide these . Perhaps the military authorities were even often inclined to punish injustice as the following example shows By a certain date the good Polish banknotes had to be exchanged into new Generalgouvernement General Government ‘ German occupied central banknotes . In order to prevent a mass exodus from the surrounding villages one representative at a time was always sent with the village assets . A beautiful corrupt Jewess whose gentleman friend was a Gendarmeriewachtmeister officer in the rural had found out when the representative would come from her village . The Wachtmeister officer decided to take the gold away from the man and promised the husband of his beautiful lady friend a 25 % share if he helped him in this undertaking . The plan succeeded but the Wachtmeister was caught demoted in front of his assembled comrades and imprisoned . The affair had however one more consequence . The Gestapo gave the Judenrat an ultimatum to produce within 3 days either the Jew or the missing money . The Jew could not be found . The missing Zloty had to be paid by the Judenrat . There remained despite an appeal being lodged nothing to do other than to raise the money by an urgent levy the damaged village never received the money . The common soldier had grown accustomed to being greeted most humbly by Jews . Presumably the rule was to greet higher ranks . But the most humble and tormented people did not differentiate and greeted the military dress in all cases . If one looked at the streets through which a group of a hundred were marching then one would notice the waving of the caps as if a gust of wind were blowing over the heads . I was once walking towards a platoon and saw the way the soldiers eyes roamed to right and left in order to establish whether the now accustomed greeting was coming . And to my amazement I twice saw soldiers leap out of the platoon onto the pavement and punch Jews who had not torn the cap quickly enough from their head . I also saw however higher ranked officers thank the Jews politely for the greeting . I experienced a short interlude with one private soldier that shows that not quite all are infected and that probably if they do not want to strut about in a mass with their brutality they have retained a civilised behaviour . I arrived too early one day at an authority and sat down because of my bad foot on a bench near the guard . After some time of covert observation the soldier came up to me . But you are not from around here either he began the conversation . I find it quite dreadful here everything is so dirty . Where do you come from then ? I asked back . From Hamburg/GPE . From beautiful Hamburg I replied to his joy and we conversed about the city . But why are you here anyway ? he interrupted suddenly . I pointed silently to my armband . We received immediately in Lublin/CAMP an armband with the Star of David and the people who like me were occupied in relief work had another overprint stamped on by the Gestapo which protected them from being claimed for other work by the occupying authorities . The sign had escaped him until now . Oh dear you are perhaps a Jewess ? But that is bad he said in a sympathetic tone . I was convinced that the desire for further discussion had deserted him all the more as meanwhile the Polish public had gathered . But he came up again and again in order to speak to me of his native city . And when he was relieved I heard the way he commended me to the young soldier who also immediately looked after me . One day there was a new phenomenon on the street scene . SA men stood at various road junctions with a beautiful breast plate on which could be read ‘ Verkehrspolizei traffic police . However the Poles could not read that and as a result there were many unpleasant interludes to which I was also a witness . I saw one old Pole unsuspectingly walk diagonally across the road where a Verkehrspolizist traffic officer greeted him with such a powerful punch that the old man fell to the ground . When he had laboriously righted himself a second blow greeted him . He staggered fell down tried to get up . A third blow from the hand of the calmly waiting SA man so that the old man remained lying in the dirty gutter . And I continued on my way on the other side of the And not only I. It was impossible to help . I did not want to believe the assertions of my friends that Lublin/CAMP could ever be in a clean condition . Passing the streets in the old quarter was already a problem in winter in spring an art . One jumped over holes and splashed around unconcerned in the standing water dirtying oneself or others . One also became impervious to it . One day I lay in the water a little unconscious from being chucked out of a farm wagon with which the Raebbe rabbi from Glusk had had me collected so that I could support his concerns before the Judenrat about the delivery of flour . The wagon overturned on its journey through mountain and valley and I was hurled against the wall of a house . When I came to I saw a crowd of gesticulating Jews standing around me . The kept at a respectful distance and the carter was only interested in righting his wagon again . This small accident did however have the favourable outcome that the Judenrat really did allow flour to be wrested from it although nothing had yet arrived from the Joint for the deportees . The sight of the woman dirty and wet from head to toe who demanded compensation for her concussion in the form of the requested foodstuff was effective in convincing them . I have not experienced any bad treatment from the authorities . Only the beginning at the passport was difficult . The young agent was probably somewhat insecure for later he behaved quite differently . Polish Jews were not permitted to emigrate he explained to me harshly at my enquiry about the necessary formalities . We are not Polish but German Jews to whom therefore this rule does not apply . There are no German Jews . Well then we are Jews from Germany/GPE . I will not discuss this question with you he replied rudely . I summoned all my courage for a safer approach and countered firmly But you will surely be so kind as to inform me which formalities are necessary for the acquisition of a passport . I have to advise my fellow countrymen about them who have an opportunity to emigrate . He explained to me grumpily that in March no applications would be processed however then reluctantly revealed the usual channels to me so that all of us who had our entry permits could submit our applications by 1st April . At this time the head of the passport office was back from holiday a young official who took the trouble to be objective and who quickly became accustomed to talk through with me all the matters to do with the Jews who were able to emigrate . And yet it is the former at that time so unkind official who had later decisively influenced me in my own case . That I alone had received the permit from the Gestapo to emigrate seems like a miracle and I recognised only with hindsight the bureaucratic oversight that emanated from a quite peculiar coincidence . I was among the first four who could apply for the emigration permit because the entry permit for a foreign country had arrived . Soon I received a summons to the Gestapo . Not a pleasant procedure my whole neighbourhood was afraid and many offered to accompany me . I feigned complete equanimity however I certainly did not feel happy as I hobbled to the building located on the outskirts of the city . There is no tramway in Lublin/CAMP . Everyone uses the Chaises a type of carriage which probably date from the time of Anna Karenina which are pulled by the thin little horses urged on with shouts over mountain and valley of the bad cobbles . But I had no money for that . It would also have been bizarre if a deported Jewess who had lost everything had driven up to the Gestapo . Very tired and inwardly concerned I arrived . In front of the door a young Volksdeutscher stood guard who turned me away with his bayonet despite the summons being produced . But I still had to speak with the head of the passport about a South African case . So I made a detour and during the discussion I constantly shirked the question whether I should tell the official about my summons to the Gestapo and in this way perhaps upset the only recently gained mutual trust . Then I said to him however at the conclusion that presumably because of my own application about which I had never spoken to him I had received a summons to the Gestapo but had not been allowed in . What the devil was he thinking of ! One must allow you in go straight back ! I took refuge behind my painful foot for I thought that the following day another guard would treat me much better . You can not allow such a thing to happen to you he added . Now I was immediately determined to try once again and with a more confident attitude I went past the young man dressed in black so that he could in no way stop me . Behind the door another man dressed in black . I my summons . Guardhouse he shouted at me . I went to the guardhouse above the entrance to which was written in large letters ‘ Juden ist der Eintritt verboten Entry is forbidden to Jews showed my summons again and was given a young man dressed in black as escort for in the Gestapo building one is not permitted to move around alone . As he could not read however something I did not know he could not even find the room and ran with me up and down the stairs . Eventually he told me to wait and went up to two SS officers who were standing at the end of the corridor . I can not watch the woman he announced in halting German saluting according to the rules . What does that mean one of the officers barked at him and took the summons from his hand . Aha Elsa Sara he said in a contemptuous tone turned towards me I looked towards him with an outwardly calm demeanour . He gave the boy a shove . I will take the lady myself he said to my not inconsiderable surprise . The lady ? Was I still a lady ? But I was a Jewess ! He came up to me and I followed him in silence . He tore open the door to a room and said to the secretary who jumped up respectfully The lady wishes to speak to you . This introduction had clearly taken the man by surprise and given me back the inner confidence . I showed my summons and asked what one wanted of me . You wish to have an emigration permit and do not even state your date of birth . Oh I am an idiot I cried relieved such a thing should not happen to me ! The answer clearly amused him . I will immediately the permit for you and send it to the passport office he said laughing and so all further steps were taken for this valuable document . No one else had received their permit from the Gestapo . A prohibition was issued against emigration for deportees which we had not anticipated . The different authorities continued to attend to the processing of the permits and allowed themselves to pay higher and higher fees which were only affordable because in the hope of emigrating soon everything expendable was sold . Then at first everyone in the same position as I derived from the approval given to me the treacherous hope that the door would be opened . When after waiting for months I actually did receive the passport one allowed me to have the certain feeling that I was only the start . But after a long time a wait of almost a year one finally received the clear decision that an emigration from Poland/GPE would not be permitted . That was a great blow for those it concerned who had entry permits to various countries in their pocket and a shadow never to be lifted over the happiness of the only one to be saved when she thought of the bitterness which must fill those who were disappointed . Unquestionably they were forced to assume that I had only looked after myself while in fact I only owed this wonderful act of providence to the chain of strange circumstances . However it took another 4 months until for me all the formalities had been completed . Although we had not received more than 10 Marks and had lost all our assets we needed however for onward migration the consent of the Finanzamt tax and the Devisenstelle foreign currency In an initial consultation which I had in March with the head of the Finanzamt I was able to establish that one had there not the slightest idea of what had happened to us . One was inclined to arrange the certificate free of charge when I reported the circumstances . Later however one demanded 10 Zloty for it and when I questioned this on behalf of a woman and asked how she was supposed to pay it the official retorted to me There are no poor Jews . I explained the situation to him and he asked What are the people living on then ? I responded On the charity of the poor Jews who share what little they have with them . There are no poor Polish Jews he repeated grumpily . At the Devisenstelle the administration was in the hands of a former officer who was able to hide his TRUE feelings under a brusque exterior . Could you get the Jews to write their submissions sensibly so that one can make comments round the edge ? I have not had such a sensible document as yours in my hand for a long time . My fellow countrymen understand as do I how to make a submission and I will get those present to do it . I do have an office here for this but I hope there will soon be an answer . It is not because of us the processing takes place in Krakow/GPE and they do not rush Judensschen Jews through . I have often had to have consultations with the man and felt that he took the trouble to help . At that he went to work very carefully so as not to betray the interest in Jewish matters . From time to time he also telephoned Krakow/GPE about Jewish cases . They must have paid for the discussion as you see one can not use a state administration for Jews . On one occasion I happened to be in the room when he was having just such a discussion . He asked about the various applications and said at the end And so there is the matter anyway . Please be so good as to free me at last from the Jew he is running into my house . With that he believed he had spoken sufficiently to the mouth of the senior authorities and that he had set in motion the matter of the Jews . The discussion about my own case ended in a very dramatic way . I had never asked him about it although during each conversation I had the secret hope to be next too one day . My submission had been made 3 months before when the young Polish secretary who had definitely not been appointed by the Nazis said to me that an answer had arrived . Outwardly calm as ever inwardly stretched to breaking point I let the conversation wash over me . At the end he said gruffly Today a large pile of permits arrived . The matter now appears to be moving forward . And he read out to me a list of unknown Polish names . I plucked up courage . How is my case going for that matter ? Also permitted . Costs 300 Zloty . Has the sum been demanded of everyone I asked in horror . No only from the Jews from Germany/GPE . Why I asked incensed why does one demand that from us after one has deprived us of all our assets ? Why are we being treated differently ? Because one has had such bad experiences with the Jews came the reply . Now for the first time my composure deserted me . How can one generalize like that ? Everywhere there are good and bad elements . Why should only the Jews be a perfect angel ! Have the Jews not served and made sacrifices for the Fatherland just as much as the other fellow citizens ? I know nothing about that . Well then take our family as an example . Both brothers fought in the War . My sister was a sister with the Red Cross . I had a leading position in the Nationaler Frauendienst National Women Service a voluntary relief All four of us have war decorations . Why have you not cited that in your submission ? he shouted at me . How is one supposed to know that ? Why should I mention something obvious ? For us service to the Fatherland was just as obvious as for you I said proudly . Provoked he banged on the table . It is a disgrace a disgrace he shouted . I did say it straight away when the office was so pleased about the permit . The woman has not got the money . We are not like that at all he added we old officers . But there sits in Krakow/GPE such a callow bunch that they could not put anywhere else and they cause trouble . I can not sell my wedding ring I said . That is the only thing of value that I am allowed to keep . But then one will say again one sees that the Jews have money and will demand even more from the next ones . Many do not even still have their wedding ring . They have sold them in order to satisfy their hunger . No I can not do anything with the permit and will remain here . I went home very gloomily . For the first time I was unsure how I should react . I asked my friends for advice . Do everything to get away they said . It is also important for us that outside someone is alive who can testify that it is worthwhile doing something for the Polish Jews . One day later a very grave warning and urging came from my friends in Stockholm/LOC as the entry permit was expiring . That gave me the push that I needed . I had things to do at the passport and met there the young official who had made my debut so much harder . I need your advice today for myself for once I said . I could meet the demand of the Devisenstelle from the proceeds of the sale of my wedding ring . But will I also really receive the passport ? We have been informed that your case is in order . One is just not clear about what sort of passport one should give you and will place obstacles in your way to the last . But if you can get hold of the money then do not let yourself be intimidated . And I followed his advice . I could of course have obtained the necessary money from my Polish friends but it went against the grain to approach them about it . I knew how hard the constraint of their monthly cash withdrawal was and it seemed to me sacrifice enough that one had entirely fed me . The handing over of the passport was still delayed for a long time although one had said to the representative of the Krakow/GPE Judenrat who had had a general consultation with the Referent adviser about Jewish emigration that my case was now in order and the other cases would follow . But no one else came afterwards although the ever increasing fees had been paid at great sacrifice . The passport which I then finally received was a Polish form stamped at the bottom Generalgouvernement valid for 4 weeks of which 2 had already elapsed . When I wanted to reject the passport the official said to me Do not complicate the matter . You will certainly be able to sort that out easily in Stockholm/LOC . And so I prepared for departure . I had still been visiting at least 2 groups during the last weeks . The representative of the Joint took me with him and in this way I got to know the place where the greatest number of my fellow countrymen were staying Piaski/GHETTO . I was pleased to see my uncle and aunt again who had developed such beneficial work in the small town . The two had always been philanthropists in the greatest way and the initial reticence of our fellow countrymen towards this married couple who they no longer considered belonged to them on sectarian grounds had indeed soon yielded to the greatest veneration of which my uncle for his 70th birthday which he celebrated during the deportation received touching evidence . However on the very day of my unforeseeable arrival both had decided to go to Lublin/CAMP to arrange for their passports . We comrades met on the country road . We could only reach out our hand to each other on forever . My relatives were transported onward with all the fellow countrymen after I had left and all the investigations into their whereabouts were fruitless . My sister was also torn away from her work and shared their fate . Unfortunately I could no longer visit Belzyce/LOC where my brother played a leading role . But I spoke to him often whenever he came to Lublin/CAMP as the representative of the matters in his village when he lent his support to the local people and to the deportees alike . I was pleased that my friends received him hospitably so that after all the primitiveness and austerity in his incredibly busy daily life he could spend a few pleasant hours in the evening in decent surroundings . Even after my departure these good people continued to be a support for him until they too were driven out of their homes . I later received news of my brother death and without knowing the circumstances I know that he did not die a natural death . A victim of his devotion to duty was said in the short message from a woman friend who was able to write to my relatives in Germany/GPE . A leadership had immediately crystallised in each village and it was interesting to observe how differently the groups developed by reason of the leading personalities . In the largest group the leader was our former Gemeindevorsteher ‘ Jewish community chairman and/or council a man of the most honourable reputation but too distant and grand to be able to make a real connection with the Polish Jews . He was still very much accepted by our people who yielded to his authority . And yet the lack of understanding towards the mentality of the residents of the village remained a shortcoming of the group that made itself felt . In this group were the most capable women of the Gemeinde but the Vorsteher disapproved of women work and only after months was convinced that the women were indeed more than useful for the work . In the second largest group a triumvirate had been established consisting of my brother a doctor and a man who until now had only appeared to be an unproductive critic but now revealed an astonishing talent for organisation . He wore himself out completely on the opposition for he possessed at first as an as yet unknown no authority . Whenever he could not manage the people he called my brother to help and he often told me how the latter again and again saved the situation with a witticism . My brother was a born parliamentarian albeit definitely not the compromiser like his sister . What he thought was right he carried through he had from his work as Father successor as chairman of the Buchdruckereibesitzverband association of owners of publishing firms experience of dealing with disputing parties particularly of collective bargaining which now stood him in good stead . He countered Yiddish with Plattdeutsch Low German he was a great admirer of Reuter 19th century author from Stavenhagen/LOC who wrote in Low which led to the most hilarious scenes . Although he had been considered by my fellow countrymen initially as a renegade his complete impartiality his devoted efforts to help everybody even the Polish Jews who turned to him and made him an arbitrator his unbending courage helped to provide him with a unique position of trust . He was probably chosen by the authorities as a former Offiziersstellvertreter Offizier Stellvertreter deputy officer junior officer in the German for the unpleasant duty of the Ordnungsdienst Order Service Jewish and had also at that time the employment office not very enjoyable work which took him in wind and all weather in his poor clothing to checkpoints on the country road . But even before the work was decreed at the same he had organised one such work himself for mental strengthening he realised immediately that ... hanging around and gossiping in the alleyways posed a great danger to the conduct of the deportees . He had the Marktplatz market place paved in the vicinity of the Versammlungsraum assembly room lavatories were even built something that the two other groups then also took up with the result that the locals did everything to dirty and destroy this ‘ unnötige Einrichtung unnecessary facility . He had the part of the cemetery where our fellow countrymen had been laid to rest beautifully renovated had a barracks erected as accommodation for the sick and arranged for plants to be grown all around . The women work was also divided into kitchen hospital office work and the like . But he also tried to preserve a cultural life amongst these primitive people and conditions that were challenged from outside . He applied himself quite particularly to the young people . Despite the official prohibition he succeeded in bringing about a kind of schooling and Piaski/GHETTO with its trained teachers soon ventured to follow the example . Birthdays blessings became communal experiences for which he not only assisted in conjuring up gifts but also in creating a festive atmosphere . He was the chosen speaker who could give people in a pithy cheerful speech ... yet shot through with seriousness an uplifting view . In his small partitioned area which had been awarded to him as his own living area as a privilege for his leading position friends gathered in the evenings whenever duty did not call him away . But he adhered quite particularly to his youth evenings which proved so popular that they burst out of the room . He planted in the young people the strength for courageous of which he himself was a model . In little Glusk/LOC there stood at the forefront an exceptionally capable and adaptable man of over 70 years who had understood how to establish the best relationship with the poor locals and the somewhat peculiar rabbi . The organisational talent of the German Jews soon bore fruit . One built wooden frames everywhere for the missing sleeping accommodation one established central kitchens in all the groups and sickbays were established for those turned away from the hospital in all 3 villages and attended by our capable doctors who had come too . My sister who was suffering very much herself worked tirelessly at the various places to which one called her . The Jewish population had initially approached the deportees with an endless readiness to help . However through the apparently boundless demands of the uninvited guests about their conditions through the later realisation that these were really the same German Jews who had always shown very little understanding to the Polish Jews and through the prospect of not being rid of the burden in human and economic terms again very soon tensions quickly emerged which were often discharged in an unpleasant way and in which both sides were at fault . Many a time cases of dispute were brought to me where I could understand the difficulty of living in close proximity with completely different people clearly enough . For the Jewish population of Poland/GPE had little with their fellow Jews from the west who had not met oppression and defamation for generations and as a result had been able to develop quite differently . One has to have had the opportunity to observe not only the Polish Jews themselves but also their environment in order to understand how this mentality had In my farewell letter to the fellow countrymen I asked them most emphatically not to forget how much gratitude owed to the Polish Jews . Only when I had acquired some distance from the conditions and in Stockholm/LOC had read much about Polish Jewish life the realisation came to me that nothing had been asked by them of us whom the poor Jews in Poland/GPE had not wanted and were forced to bear . But for us that meant a descent onto the lowest step of culture onto which we were forced but were not willing to endure . And yet everything that I can bear witness to from the conditions at that time and that had been difficult enough to experience seems to me merely a dress rehearsal for the tragedies of the following deportations . It moved me deeply to read in the letters from my brother how very much he and the others had tried to ease for the later deportees the arrival into the terrible conditions . How they who had to dwell in such cramped quarters and knew how overcrowding makes unharmonious factors more difficult for the oppressed people crowded together even more in order to help the ‘ Neue new people . But how they also admired the newcomers who came in clean clothes whilst our people had already become accustomed to the tattered exterior . The village has acquired a completely different appearance wrote my brother . For although the Reichsvertretung had paid Reichsmarks to the Gestapo in order to release our clothing which had been left behind after a long wait only a little had arrived and this small amount also indicated an unfavourable earlier exchange . The things which our suitcases contained which we had brought with us to Lublin/CAMP and left behind on the station platform we did not see again . But I have learned from an authentic that they were situated well sorted through in Gestapo locations furnished with the label of the current owner who will have sent them securely back to his loved ones at home . One has often asked me how the life of the deportees developed . If I answer that then I must always make the qualification that I can only judge the early beginnings of a deportation . Apparently the Herr Gauleiter had gone to work on us so quickly that the plans had not been completely worked out . But already during the 5 months of which I am giving a report conditions had gradually worsened . One was also perhaps waiting for the echo which the first actions would find in the world and when this did not come one proceeded resourcefully further along the road . My fellow countrymen were later spared nothing of all the horror about which news then trickled out . However at first the deportees had in their small villages complete freedom of movement . One went walking unimpeded along the village street glad to be able to escape from the dreadful constraints of the space and never being alone . One was as a city dweller of course unhappy having to spend the day without any stimulus . Gathering in the communal area to play cards and talk offered the only diversion . But almost everyone carried the class distinctions from the ‘ frühere Welt old world with him . In Piaski/GHETTO our Kantor cantor had mustered a mixed choir which gave great pleasure . In Glusk/GHETTO the old people had established an afternoon for presentations of former great spiritual pleasures . Do not let us also starve spiritually one old lady wrote to me and in this way gave me the impetus for a book collection . One can not sufficiently admire the mental strength which under such difficult adverse and frightening external conditions did have an impact on the surroundings . Especially on the young . For instance e.g. an active young man in Piaski/GHETTO had managed to obtain from a farmer a small piece of land that he was now cultivating with the children . There was no lack of young spectators from the village who made fun particularly of the fetching of water . Why are you fetching water ? It will rain soon . Why are you planting tomatoes one buys them . But one day the young instigator of the garden discovered a group of young Polish Jews who were digging a piece of land . What are you doing here then he asked . What the Deitschen Deutschen Germans can do we can do too was the reply . The examples multiplied . With deep concern I saw these youths running wild who well deserved to be saved . My aunt a very motherly woman took an interest particularly in confinements and new borns . I received horrified descriptions about the conditions which even the newly qualified country midwife could not overcome . The women held onto old customs and prejudices and were hard to influence . Here and there my forceful aunt managed to achieve small successes mostly through bribery in the form of baby clothes and the like as a in which our friends in Germany/GPE were instrumental for at that time one could still send unlimited parcels which arrived in increasing numbers . The group leaders imposed a small levy on the recipients in order to be able to do the same for those who had neither relatives nor friends at home . I myself became occasionally overwhelmed with parcels of the most beautiful contents . I was a very well known name through my former activities and so much of the involvement concentrated on me . Whenever I came home in the evenings the small daughter of the Advokat greeted me with the words Tante lots of parcels . And she enthusiastically assisted me with the unpacking during which now and again some unknown treat or other would also fall out and helped repack for the groups to which I joyfully sent my bounty . I was particularly delighted about the understanding about sending medicines and bandages which our sickbays urgently needed . But I placed the representatives in the groups in a difficult position as the consignments were not enough for everyone by far and did not have equivalent contents . The people are always very quick to believe in preferential treatment and now these poor deprived people for whom the smallest trifle turned into a priceless asset . Now I became acquainted with the revaluation of all values in the truest sense of the word . The only way was to let fate decide in order to control the dissatisfaction . How horrified I was later to learn that frequently the items gained in this way were sold . Until it became clear to me that I represented the ethics of the full stomach . For those who were starving it was indeed most important to satisfy the stomach . Much has changed in the meantime in the deportation . Everything is relative . The inadequate accommodation in the dwellings of the poor Polish Jews must compared to that which later had to serve the deportees as lodging still be called bearable . For our people it was dreadful enough . This overcrowding in the narrow dirty space sleeping on chairs tables on a dirty floor rarely in a bed and then not as the sole occupant one washbasin for everyone that at night had to serve yet other purposes what torture that was ! Added to that the inadequate food which was only improved a little by the subsidy from the Joint which considering the demands which were growing to monstrous proportions only amounted to a drop and completely petered out when no more funds could come from America/GPE . If during the first weeks the occupation of the deportees depended on the ingenuity of the leadership then it soon completely changed . First of all came the requisition of the younger workforce . The people would have been quite content to stop loitering around if the attendant circumstances had not been so terrifying . There came e.g. lorries into the village driven by an SS squad who demanded a line up of residents and deportees of a certain age . Such a line up cleverly did not happen to the Polish Jews but however to the decent Germans . In addition it was as if the Poles had disappeared off the face of the Earth/LOC . Therefore one made up the necessary number with elderly deported men . Our people are loaded onto the lorries and drive into the unknown leaving women and children behind distraught . In Lublin/CAMP which was informed by telephone at that time one was still permitted to telephone from the small villages it was then possible to track the men down to transit camps in order to provide them with food and to let the family have news . During my time the men were required for works on the Bug/LOC and Vistula . When they arrived at their places of work they discovered no accommodation areas and had to spend the night in the open air until such time as they had constructed the barracks themselves . Later those deployed to work were prepared somewhat more systematically and received expert supervision from our ranks . The Judenrat had to pay for all the expenses purchase all the material and supply the provisions . As for the latter the standards of the Polish Jews applied thus they were not adequate for our needs in either the quality or the quantity . When later the deployment for the harvesting of the rich crop came also workers for office and factory work in Lublin/CAMP were required probably in order to release the Reichsdeutsche for military service there was a decent reward and rations from the employers . One has often put the question to me whether anybody had thoughts of escaping and whether one had sabotaged the work . I was very surprised by this question . No one had thought of deliberately performing work badly . No one had thought of escape as I believe I can claim . I later occupied myself greatly with the psychological background to our behaviour after I saw the reaction of other peoples . I believe we were driven by two motives . Firstly we were convinced that it could only be a case of a temporary stay in the deportation . The same lack of comprehension in respect of the actual circumstances which had prevented so many of us from emigrating early enough because we did not know the political situation . And secondly we came from the bourgeois democratic sphere which does not start revolutions but believes in the legal change of government . And that the German Volk people amongst whom we had been living so assimilated and possessed many good friends would not tolerate the dictatorship for long seemed obvious to us who allowed our eyes to be shielded with blinkers from our democratic ideals . Many a one of us had learned to think historically . The awareness that always during great political upheavals people were banished from their Fatherland/LOC who later would be brought back and recognised as the most faithful sons seemed a comfort and source of strength . I must honestly say like that Polish Jew I am no exception . The road to freedom Nobody in the Judenrat had believed that the passport would be received . When I spoke to the Präsident president about allowing a successor from among the deportees to become acquainted with the work as a precautionary measure who however in the absence of such a friendly intake as I found them at their best would have to receive a small he laughed at me . When you have the passport in your hands we will talk about it further . But when I did have the passport in my hands I did not want to talk any more but to leave at once . However I was able to have a clear conscience having secretly prepared a successor in the person of the former head of the Palästinaamt ‘ Palestine/GPE office ... setup ... to handle the organisation regulation and implementation of Jewish immigration to who from time to time came to Lublin/CAMP to visit his sick daughter and then used the opportunity to learn from me . This very suitable successor who had the necessary empathy with the Polish mentality and was also valued by my fellow countrymen unfortunately only held office for a short time because he fell victim to epidemic typhus . The Judenrat was very excited about the fact that someone from Poland/GPE would be released and so would be able to establish contact with the outside world . They really wanted to give me a farewell party but I asked to be allowed to depart immediately . It was quite strange that I who had been able to await the outcome so calmly and had come to terms with the thought of not giving up my work now was gripped by a psychosis and would have preferred to avail myself of the next train . But I had to state that I also agreed to join in a farewell session of the Judenrat . My sister had as if driven by a premonition come to Lublin/CAMP early in the morning and took part in the moving event . The splendid Dezernent für Wohlfahrtsfragen department head for welfare questions with whom I had had the most to do gave the farewell speech in perfect German . I was able to thank him from a deeply moved heart now with the words of Hans Sachs Euch macht leicht mir macht Ihr schwer gebt ihr mir Armen zu viel Ehr . 63 You make it easy for yourself you make it difficult for me you do me a poor man too much honour . Attempt to quote the character Hans Sachs in Wagner opera Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg . . Truly the gratitude of these good people for showing them understanding and standing side by side with them when help is needed is indescribable . Their farewell cries Do not forget us help us ! are deeply embedded in my heart . Like the dove from Noah ark I was set free . But oh I found no country for the poorest that I had to leave behind with sadness and concern . Immediately after my arrival in Stockholm/LOC I did make contact with the Joint in the U.S.A./GPE in order to make the donations flow again . But it was only possible to dispatch from there for a short time and not sufficient resources by far . In addition a big relief operation was required which I endeavoured again and again to instigate . With the entry of America/GPE into the war the transfers were soon made impossible anyway . For my fellow countrymen I organised fundraising with the help of my friends in Stockholm/LOC which in accordance with their private nature and my unfamiliarity and uncertainty on foreign soil had been more through the others than through me quite successful which however could of course not remotely satisfy the great need for help . And again I laid myself open to the accusation of only helping some and not all . For still one saw in me the person who had cared for all equally . For all my efforts not only the deportees still stood before my eyes however but the entire unfortunate Polish Jewry . It has taken a long time before my spirit could overcome the depression about this failure of my mission . I had the shameful feeling of having no entitlement to a life in peace and freedom when I had to disappoint the hope of so many unfortunate people . In the car which the Judenrat provided laden with flowers so that I could not hold them in my arm I drove in the brightest sunshine back down the road to the railway station which once my poor husband had had to walk along in stockinged feet . Everything was so unreal so incredible like a dream . At the station the dear wife of the Advokat said goodbye to me as she was not permitted to go onto the platform . She promised to lay my flowers as a final farewell on the grave of my husband whom I now had to leave behind in foreign soil but cared for by friendship . How much would the woman so admired because of her courage have liked to be ‘ die Kleine the little one again ! To return alone to Germany/GPE what an adventure ! On the platform I was called back by a guard . However I calmly produced my pass apparently unconcerned that my armband which admittedly had been beautifully embroidered in silk by the Judenrat with the Star of David had been presented to me must however reveal the pariah to my fellow passengers . The proceeds from my wedding ring had after paying for the travel expenses still a small sum left over which I really wanted to send from the first station Warsaw/GPE to my sister . However the train was very late so that I found no other opportunity and despite the insignificance of the sum looked anxiously towards the checkpoint . But the German officer dismissed my explanation with a wave of the hand and went on . At that one said opposite me If it is inconvenient for Madam to travel to Berlin/GPE with foreign currency then I will gladly exchange it for you as soon as we are across the border . It is all the same to my firm whether I settle in Zloty or Marks . But when I had left the compartment for a short time I realised from the chillier atmosphere that one had probably only now discovered my armband which showed up against the light coat . When we had passed the border I wanted to give the young man the foreign currency . Forgive me I did not know that you are a Jewess now I can not do it he said to me sullenly . As quick as lightning the thought flashed through my mind why should I trust him not to denounce me on arrival ? Who will believe that the Jewess had shown the officer on duty the notes ? Could I have made difficulties for myself in the last hour ? And so I tore the banknotes and let them fly out . I sat at the window and stared out sleepless into the nocturnal darkness . Sweden/GPE Sweden/GPE Sweden/GPE sang the wheels . Is it possible that I am travelling to Sweden/GPE ? Like dull listlessness it lay on my brain . But then I travelled into the well known Berlin/GPE station . I had been able to telegraph my arrival to the Reichsvertretung and despite the early morning hour I was met by colleagues and friends . As if in a dream without seeing to left or right I travelled to the acquaintance who wanted to put me up for the two nights of my stay . I had scarcely freshened up when the telephone call came that one was expecting me immediately in the office . There the colleagues greeted me with roses . Everyone had gathered and a member of the Vorstand that brave man who let his family travel alone to England/GPE because he believed he would not be able to answer for it if he left his work and who has since met his death in the concentration camp welcomed me with undeserved words of praise about the work I had done and brave conduct . I then reported back about the conditions in Lublin/CAMP until one urged me to go to the Swedish consulate for a visa . There one was enormously kind to me . One knew my fate and although my passport was not a proper passport one still granted me a visa . My colleagues in the Hilfsverein Hilfsverein der deutschen Juden ‘ Aid Association of German Jews provided financial and practical assistance to Jews seeking to tried to absolutely insist that I demand a German passport from the appropriate authorities but now I roused myself from my lethargy and resisted . I wanted to have nothing more to do with the German authorities . I was entirely convinced that one would make difficulties for me at the last moment . The colleagues stood stunned before my outburst she whom they only knew as self controlled . However I was no longer a brave woman but an emigrant gripped by the usual psychosis . The two days of my stay in Berlin/GPE were filled to the brim with talks . Also despite the size of the city the news of my arrival had spread like wildfire and I was assailed by relatives of the deportees by representatives of associations had to work with the excellent case worker in the Reichsvertretung through our documents that had reached them in order to demonstrate opportunities for my fellow countrymen to emigrate . One was convinced like me that I formed only the start of a mass onward migration from Poland/GPE . The meeting with the leadership of the Reichsvertretung which had the unthinkable burden of representing the Jews in Germany/GPE I will never forget . I was welcomed in the most affectionate way and gave a report which concerned principally the organisational questions for the necessary assistance . I later reproached myself for having reported so much of the harrowing details and thereby perhaps to have caused alarm . There is certainly a big difference whether like us one is suddenly placed before unknown conditions from which one hopes to return or whether like the poor Jews later one must wait for the dreadful and inescapable fate . But my information has then been after all the reason for different organisational measures so that e.g. no other transport departed without appropriate leadership something that is of greatest importance not least from the psychological point of view of the poor victims . One did now have time to prepare oneself as the transports were ‘ vorbestellt ordered in advance i.e. the Reichsvertretung was notified and the information and leave taking of the unfortunate people ranked surely among the most heartbreaking tasks of those charged with it . The strain and agitation to which the turmoil of these two days brought me left me quite suddenly listless . I was hugely ashamed of myself for during the whole time of the deportation such a thing had not happened to me . And it was good for me that the curfew for Jews was so early that the stream of visitors who were waiting for me when I came home could not stay too long . The least time ebbed away for the members of my family . Both sides were accustomed to me belonging predominantly ‘ to the others . However I still think about it with a guilty conscience . The next morning it was then alone to the airport for no one was permitted to accompany me there and I was more anxiously afraid than ever before . The flight to Sweden/GPE had been given to me and booked in advance by the Reichsvertretung . The customs check passed off very quickly but when I wanted to go through the barrier a Zollbeamter customs officer detained me and demanded the handing over of my fur . As I produced the permit from the Devisenstelle in Lublin/CAMP he ordered instead the detailed examination of the seams and a body search . The aeroplane was delayed by this unnecessary hold up . That was my last meeting with a German official . As I took my seat by the window I thought Just do not see anything of the country that I loved so fervently and that now does not know me anymore . And the weather god granted my request and sent us towards thick grey clouds through which the aeroplane had to battle . The rain beat monotonously and gave the exhausted woman sleep . When I awoke it was light again . We were already flying over land and I caught sight of little red houses . I am flying over Sweden/GPE I thought incredulously as if in a dream . Sweden/GPE Sweden/GPE Sweden/GPE beat my heart . Slowly the great bird glided to earth . I was the first to stand at the door . Am I dreaming did I not see this in a film ? I was already on the steps and looking around expectantly for the friends whom I had been able to notify by telegram of my arrival . I did not know that no one was permitted to enter the airport . Something or other will still happen to me it said fearfully inside me . As if in a dream I went into the hall to complete the formalities . As if in a dream I climbed into the waiting omnibus . There oh terror my name was called out . Now something dreadful is going to happen and no one knows where I am ! A car from the city is waiting for you the voice continued . As if in a dream I climbed out again . There stood a beautiful taxi that seemed splendid to me like a Rolls Royce . In the back of the car lay a big bouquet of roses . I climbed in the car rolled slowly out of the unfenced area . Outside friends freedom were waiting for me ! The miracle had happened the dream had become reality . I had been saved ! ! And I sensed a new mission . 1 ‘ untersteuzt in original . ‘ unterstuezt is intended . 2 Gudrun Maierhof ‘ Central Organizations of Jews in Germany/GPE 1933 1943 Jewish Womens Archive Encyclopedia last accessed 17th November 2016 . 3 Presumably headquarters of the Reichsvertretung . Gudrun Maierhof ‘ Central Organizations of Jews in Germany/GPE 1933 1943 . 4 ‘ American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee and Refugee Aid United/GPE States/GPE Holocaust Memorial Museum henceforth USHMM Holocaust Encyclopedia last accessed 14 November 2016 . 5 ‘ Adolf Eichmann USHMM Holocaust Encyclopedia last accessed 14 November 2016 . 6 Ibid . 7 Gerald D Feldman ‘ Allianz and the German Insurance Business 1933 1945 Cambridge/GPE Cambridge University Press 2001 p.96 . 8 Elizabeth Harvey ‘ We Forgot All Jews and Poles German Women and the Ethnic Struggle in Nazi Occupied Poland/GPE Contemporary European History 10 no . 3 2001 pp . 447 61 p.450 . 9 ‘ vor in original . Presumably ‘ wer is intended . 10 ‘ Haltund in original . Presumably ‘ Haltung is intended . 11 40 in original rather than ‘ 4 ° . 12 The Réaumur temperature scale was introduced in the eighteenth century but was later superseded by other methods . ‘ Réaumur temperature scale Encyclopaedia Britannica last accessed 14 November 2016 . The Réaumur scale is described as ‘ Graf Réaumur in a poem . Christian Morgenstern ‘ Kronprätendenten Kalliope . last accessed 14 November 2016 . 13 Celsius value obtained using conversion table . Converworld ‘ Convert Reaumur to Celsius last accessed 14 November 2016 . 14 The Wiener Library for the Study of the Holocaust and Genocide Pogrom November 1938 Testimonies from Kristallnacht ed . Ruth Levitt London Souvenir Press Ltd. 2015 p.622 . 15 ‘ 7 Jahre in original . Presumably 70 Jahre is intended . 16 The Wiener Library Pogrom/GPE November 1938 p.624 . 17 ‘ Hans Frank USHMM Holocaust Encyclopedia last accessed 14 November 2016 . 18 ‘ Jewish Councils Judenraete USHMM Holocaust Encyclopedia last accessed 14 November 2016 . 19 Isaiah Trunk Judenrat The Jewish Councils in Eastern Europe Under Nazi Occupation Lincoln USA/GPE University of Nebraska Press 1972 pp . 333 334 . 20 ‘ Toad in original . Presumably ‘ Tod is intended . 21 ‘ sandt in original . Possibly ‘ sanft is intended . 22 ‘ Erfierungstod in original . Presumably ‘ Erfrierungstod is intended . 23 ‘ Stungen in original . Presumably ‘ Stunden is intended . 24 ‘ indem in original . Presumably ‘ in dem is intended . 25 ‘ Allgemeingiltige in original . Presumably ‘ Allgemeingültige is intended . 26 ‘ Duete in original . Presumably ‘ Tuete or ‘ Tüte is intended . 27 ‘ Schlies in original . Presumably ‘ Schlief is intended . 28 ‘ Józef Piłsudski Encyclopaedia Britannica last accessed 14 November 2016 . 29 ‘ ihm in original . Presumably ‘ i m is intended . 30 Wiener Library Pogrom/GPE November 1938 p.608 . 31 ‘ Artzt in original . Presumably ‘ Art is intended . p.626 . 33 Wiener Library Pogrom November 1938 p.622 . 34 ‘ schopfen in original . Presumably ‘ schöpfen is intended . 138 1957 Porsche 597 Jagdwagen 4x4 Utility Bonhams last accessed 14 November 2016 . 36 Christopher Browning Ordinary Men Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland/GPE London/GPE Penguin Books 2001 p.6 . 37 Ibid p.4 . 38 ‘ Raebbi in original . 39 ‘ Passtelle in original . Passstelle is intended . 40 ‘ darfu in original . Presumably ‘ dafür is intended . 41 ‘ Passtelle in original . Passstelle is intended . 42 ‘ zuegte in original . Presumably ‘ zeugte is intended . 43 ‘ ferit in original ‘ fertig may have been intended . 44 Wiener Library Pogrom November 1938 p.607 . 45 Ibid p.606 . 46 Raffael Scheck ‘ Women against Versailles Maternalism and Nationalism of Female Bourgeois Politicians in the Early Weimar Republic German Studies Review 22 no . 1 1999 pp . 21 42 p.28 . 47 ‘ Passtelle in original . Passstelle is intended . 48 ‘ Abschlied in original . ‘ Abschied is intended . 49 ‘ Piaki in original . ‘ Piaski/GHETTO is intended . 50 Wiener Library Pogrom November 1938 p.608 . Niederdeutsch Westfälische Wilhelms Universität Münster last accessed 14 November 2016 . Stone ‘ The Kaiser Army The German Army in World War One London/GPE Bloomsbury Publishing 2015 pp.166 167 . 53 Christoph Mick ‘ Incompatible Experiences Poles Ukrainians and Jews in Lviv/LOC under Soviet and German Occupation 1939 44 Journal of Contemporary History Vol . 46 No . 2 April 2011 pp . 336 363 p.353 . 54 ‘ von ebenher in original . ‘ von nebenher is intended . 55 ‘ Ausgarren in original . Presumably ‘ Ausharren is intended . 56 ‘ Verwandschaft in original . ‘ Verwandtschaft is intended . 57 ‘ geform in original . ‘ geformt is intended . 58 ‘ wie in original . ‘ wir is intended . 59 ‘ authentistischberfahren in original . ‘ authentistisch erfahren is intended . 60 ‘ Belohnunh in original . ‘ Belohnung is intended . 61 ‘ Entfelt in original . ‘ Entgelt is intended . 62 Wiener Library Pogrom November 1938 p.620 . Wagner ‘ Libretti Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg Act III scene V 1868 . last accessed 14 November 2016 . 64 Wiener Library Pogrom November 1938 p.610 . 
Schoenewald describes in detail the work done by the Jewish Women Guild at Bochum/GPE between the years 1934 1938 . In particular she speaks of the measures to assist the stateless Eastern Jews who were deported from Germany/GPE in October 1938 . Polenaktion . She praises the work of the Joodse Vrouwenraad in Holland/GPE with whom she worked together on various occasions . Holidays for Jewish children in Holland/GPE placing of women and girls with Dutch families etc . . 7 . References Bertha Pappenheim the brilliant complex personality founder of the Juedische Frauenbund Hannah Karminski her devoted much younger disciple who considered it her duty to remain in Germany/GPE to the last Rabbiner Dr. Leo Baeck on Hannah Karminski still unexplained death . Aus der Arbeit des Juedischen Frauenbundes in Boghum/LOC 1934 1938 It may be more tempting to describe dramatic events but small and seemingly insignificant occurrences are often more illuminating and give a clearer picture of the problems with which we had to do battle in our daily lives i.e. every day . Nowadays one often hears It is impossible that this or that person who was so close to these events did not know about them or gave such a FALSE report . Here is an illustration of this I was living in Bochum/GPE and one day I was invited to a general assembly of the local group of the Union of Jewish Women in Gelsenkirchen/CAMP which incorporated several neighbouring communities . As the president of the Union I would usually be met at the railway station on such occasions but as a precaution I had noted the address of the new Jewish Community Centre because almost everywhere we were no longer permitted the use of public localities . I took a cab and was most surprised when I was questioned with expressions of consternation and astonishment as to how I had managed to find my way when I had not met their representative . My reply that I had taken a cab was met with general disbelief especially when I replied to their dismayed questions that I had given the address of the Jewish Community Centre . The answer to the puzzle In Gelsenkirchen/CAMP it was strictly forbidden to accept a Jewish passenger or for a Jew to take a cab under the threat of punishment for both parties . We who lived in the neighbouring town had no idea of this incisive measure . Had anyone asked me about it I would have simply denied it although I must have known as it was a neighbouring community . Another incident on the same day one of the greatest difficulties for all our organisations consisted of the rule that we had to submit the details of every meeting and that we were not permitted to alter the slightest detail such as agenda location time speakers topic . The registration had to arrive at the relevant authority by post at the agreed time not earlier not later so that any irregularity 2 in the delivery could be disastrous for the respective organisation not only through the cancellation of the meeting but the dissolution of the organisation . Usually two representatives of the Gestapo were present at each session to supervise it . On this particular day in Gelsenkirchen/CAMP it happened that the main speaker a rabbi was telegraphically recalled through the sudden illness of his wife . I was asked to come to the rescue and to give an account of the Union of Jewish Women . The venerable gentlemen of the Gestapo two youngsters gave their permission with the warning that they would keep a strict eye on this unforeseen speech . I still remember expressing my satisfaction with it and promising them that they would hear many things that they had previously not known . In this way I could be certain to have at least two attentive listeners a positive outcome for any speaker!There were no consequences so that I ca comment on the effect ! 3 The expulsion of the Eastern Jews Ostjuden 1938 . Why am I so frightened merely to write about this event why does my heart beat so hard as to take my breath away even today as soon as I think about it ? Events that directly threatened my own fate and life occurred before then and afterwards but this day lives in my memory like an abyss a tear that can never close a wound that will never heal . And yet it all happened so calmly so organised no murder no manslaughter no torture I almost wrote . But that was exactly what it was a long drawn out cold cruel torture . One did not need to have the imagination of a poet to be a Dante to think of the lower circles of hell ! I thought that I would not forget the smallest detail of that day but the date has escaped me completely . I only know it was a bitterly cold October day in 1938 . According to Jewish tradition it all began on the evening before or rather the afternoon . The doorbell rang continuously soon a whole circle of Jewish people known and unknown a cross section of the entire community was seated in our large sitting room library . The tangle of voices made me realise that something was up but at first it was difficult to extract the facts from the contradictory rumours . All the Eastern Jews have been arrested No only the Poles Quite the opposite they are still free only the Stateless ! The community secretary came to her boss that was my husband and reported at last reasonably authentically so far nobody had been arrested but the stateless Eastern Jews had been banished and had to leave town early the next morning together with their families . What advice should we give them passive resistance appeal for postponement acceptance of the expulsion ? This depended on the circumstances whether it was a local measure in which case the community or the Jewish general organisation could possibly protest to the Party Leadership and at least try to achieve a postponement or if it was a general order from Berlin/GPE . I therefore telephoned the Jewish communities of Essen/CAMP and/CAMP Dortmund/CAMP and despite the overlapping confirmations also the Central Council of Jews in Berlin/GPE . After a discussion with Dr. Leo Baeck and his council we had no choice but to accept the tough fact and to help the poor expelled people as much as possible . After I had called the office of the Jewish Women Union in Berlin/GPE and after discussions with Hannah Karminski in my capacity as Union President 4 in order to find means and ways to organise care stations at the most important railway junctions we began the immediate local tasks . Firstly we needed to solicit the help of the few Jewish car owners which was not difficult as most of them were gathered in our home . They immediately began to collect suitcases to enable the banished people to take as many of their possessions as possible . Each time the doorbell rang another stressful message arrived All the men concerned have been taken to prison . At 8 in the morning the women and children must be at the railway station but they are completely helpless and need support . So personal assistance was required . – The men are refusing the food in the prison they only want to eat kosher food . What was to be done ? The motorcade drove to all the Jewish butchers to buy all their kosher sausages then to the bakers who promised to reserve several hundred fresh bread rolls in the morning . We quickly recruited help with the scouring of the large copper washing kettle and so we were able to appear at the prison at the crack of dawn with ample hot food . Brushing aside the astonished guards we arrived at the inner courtyard just as the pathetic little heap of Jews was lined up straight . The supervisor in charge who was known to me indicated that we should deal with the meal at the railway station and even offered his car for transporting the steaming cauldron . So far it all seemed quite humane as in general constant activity helps to overcome inner agitation . This only proved partly TRUE on that day ... At the railway station a teaming mass of agitated weeping and screaming women and children had gathered and ever more lorries drove up and as it were discharged their pitiful load on the forecourt . Bochum/GPE was the collection place for the surrounding small and larger localities with a population mainly of workers . I should take this opportunity to explain why there was such a concentration of Eastern Jews in the Ruhr/LOC area . During WWI when Germany/GPE occupied Polish lands Polish men partly with their families were forced to move to the Ruhr/LOC area to work in the mines which had been denuded of men . There were so many of them that the communities concerned opened Jewish job centres to look after these involuntary immigrants . Already during WWI or shortly afterwards the mine authorities took a survey amongst these institutions to establish the contribution of the Jewish foreigners . I read the results myself at the time which were throughout satisfactory and partly outstanding . After the war these people opted 5 to remain in Germany/GPE where they returned to their previous occupations in business etc . thereby losing their Polish nationality and being regarded as deserters in Poland/GPE . For them a return to Poland/GPE would have meant the death penalty . This made their expulsion so very tragic . Those who had been brought to Germany/GPE as children and those who had been born in Germany/GPE knew nothing of Poland/GPE had no relationship with it and neither spoke nor understood the language . On the day of the expulsion and banishment there were more pressing needs to be dealt with . Through negotiations with the supervising Gestapo officer my acquaintance from the prison yard and from the children holiday transport to Holland/GPE I had succeeded in reserving the 3rd class waiting room for the women and children so that the newly mobilised Jewish Women Union and – club were able to begin an extensive programme of food distribution . The well known kind Jewish heart exhausted itself in cheese sandwiches cake and coffee . The sausages had been exclusively served to the starving men . It was not difficult to conclude that in some communities the women and children had been fetched from their beds . All of them were only too ready and keen to relate their troubles . After I had telephoned Herr Parnes to elicit his permission to charge the costs to the Bochum/GPE community we activated the motorcade again in order to collect woollen blankets and warm underwear from the Jewish shops that were still available . The continuously renewing line of recipients did not come to an end but humanity in all its manifestations merely appeared tragic not repulsive . Only when the same face appeared again and again in the queue and the competitors became rebellious justice and necessity had to take precedence over the heart . The stationmaster had disclosed to me that it would be impossible to organise a special train before 11 p.m. At the same time he promised to add a luggage compartment so that the passengers would be able to sleep in their seats . This offered us the opportunity to drive some of the men for whom I had given a guarantee back home where they were able to pack bigger cases and thus take some of their belongings with them especially children things and warm clothes . On listening to the men one could hear again and again how very worried they were about the fate of their businesses . Because of this I quickly returned home to get my husband who was a lawyer to issue forms for powers of attorney specifically for this purpose . With these people were able to nominate relatives or the Jewish Community to represent their interests . Even then faith in the efficacy of German justice and business dealings was as great as before . I do not know if this measure had any practical value after the 6 events of the 9th November 1938 but no other measure no food distribution not even the permission to come out of the icy cold evening air into the warmth of the waiting room and to join their wives and children caused even a fraction of the reassurance that the issuing of the Powers of Attorney had produced which were pressed into my hands at times with words of prayer . Other details ? There were dozens that could be related . E.g. there was the 14year old boy an apprentice who had been collected from his business . His parents lived in Essen/CAMP and I asked that he should be sent there . When the official made a call it turned out that the Essen/CAMP transport had already left and so one could only hope that the child would somehow meet his parents at the border . We were told that the transports would be joined together at one point which happened in fact in that these helpless people were abandoned in the no land between the German and Polish borders on the open fields . We dressed the boy in warm clothing and gave him a small travelling case and nightwear . Never before or after have I seen such a beaming proud face . My little friend did not move from my side all day and later sent me faithfully the ready addressed postcard which was also in his travelling case saying that he had not found his parents ! I did not learn anything further 9 November occurred in the meantime . I had long since noticed an ancient paralysed man he and an evidently highly feverish young girl were definitely not fit to be transported . Even the Nazi doctor we summoned had to agree but both of them refused to go to the hospital and insisted on staying with their people . The explosion of anger on the part of the young doctor – incidentally the only such occurrence of the day – expressed itself in the sense I ca remember the exact words that one should not have bothered him concerning the Jew Rabble . In response I told him again in the sense of that I was responsible for his inconveniencing because I had assumed that this was an expulsion of undesirable Jews but not a death sentence but if these people wanted to go voluntarily as they preferred death to remaining in Germany/GPE then I could fully understand them . I can still see his surprised stupid expression with which he handed me his referral to the hospital . Then he whispered with the supervisor surreptitiously indicating me and then departed muttering and shrugging his shoulders . I think this was the only moment of satisfaction and even fleeting humour for the observers of this scene . However nobody succeeded in changing the minds of those two patients . The paralysed ancient man calmly allowed himself to be tied to his chair in order to be fit for transport . 7 Expulsion of the Stateless Eastern Jews from Nazi Germany/GPE November 1938 This has turned into a lengthy report but it was a long day packed with tragic individual scenes which left me with the memory of a tangled confusion . Every individual fate was certainly tragic but over everything hovered the threat to the total fate of all the Jews in Germany/GPE . Fortunately human nature has a regulating power sensitivity increases up to a certain climax – and then becomes dulled . Thus with the arrival of an early dusk a kind of paralysing sluggishness descended on the teaming mass of people . The last woollens had been distributed hunger and thirst had been quenched the good fairies of the women club and also the selfless drivers had returned home . The children had found peace in the protective arms of their mothers slept on their laps or at their feet and probably gave off a little of their trusting confidence to their surroundings . However when they were told at 10.3 Everyone to the platform we experienced a mass psychosis of the purest form everybody rushed pushed although nobody had longed for this moment . The mothers cried out for their children who were holding their hand or their skirt whilst the children cried for their mothers any attempt to create order in this chaos was prone to failure . But in the end everybody was on the platform with sack and pack as it is said so accurately where huge piles of woollen blankets were arranged for distribution . This made a troop of the H.J. Hitler the opposite platform very envious . I hope that the ensuing conversation between us developed in them the recognition that this was not a joy ride or a night exercise but that the recipients of these woollen blankets depended on them for their very lives . The excitement rose to a climax when a distant signal announced the arrival of the train . It arose like a moan and a sob from one single large body and at the same time the hands of the surrounding women and children clung to us as we seemed to them to be a solid support . I remember precisely that I told them It may not be much longer that you outside in a foreign country will perhaps say Nebbich pity those poor things who are still in Germany/GPE now . They will have nobody to support them when their transport comes about ! At least you have someone to wish you Masseltoff good luck and Shalom peace be with you . A handshake and the storming of the seats on the train began . Here once again the natural safety valve the physical wishes and needs of the moment displace the awareness of destiny . 8 One scene which throws a bright light on the situation in Nazi Germany/GPE must be recorded here when the afore mentioned old venerable Jew in his Kaftan and with his round hat tied to his chair was carried into the train I heard a young man in a small group of three Nazi youths say to his mates Hey just look at this clown you simply have to make a sketch of him in your pad . Whereupon I in my fury turned on them and added not very gently Yes you do that and then never forget what you are witnessing here . In all your dreams it should appear to you until the end of days ! Again this astonished embarrassed smile . Whoever spoke like that could not be one of us ? Maybe a Nazi Women representative ? In any case prudence was the better part of valour in this case and so the heroes slunk away without a sketch!Who does not know the feeling of being totally abandoned when a normal train has just left the platform and instead of the former hustle and bustle one is surrounded by silence and emptiness . In that fateful night this was heightened into something almost unbearable so that I rejected the comforting words of the station master and the supervisor in my first emotional reaction . But for the sake of justice I must mention in this report how they carried out an inhuman order in a humane and much milder manner . They too were Germans . Postscript Through a report by the Office of the Jewish Women Union I later learned that in most collection places the transports had happened more quickly that this made the setting up of food distribution on the transit stations impossible that the tragic trains had been diverted onto inaccessible sidings . In Germany/GPE very little could be found out about the fate of those who had been abandoned in no land . This cutting off all connections this division of the Jewish community into helpless little parts was one of the most effective tactics to induce a feeling of helplessness and abandonment . The Jewish organisations tried to fight against this by grasping every possibility of staying connected but their fate was overshadowed by the feared suspicion of spreading horror propaganda . I particularly recall a personal experience at the advisory council of the Reichsvertretung National Jewish Representative Council in 1934 or 1935 . I shall try to find other witnesses still alive . 9 As far as the expulsion campaign is concerned it is to be noted that each person was only permitted to take RM 10 . Because many of them were wealthy individuals the consequence of a warning by the supervising official in Bochum/GPE was that many of the intimidated men entrusted me with Thousands naturally against a receipt and an indication where the money was to be delivered . Others who had been snatched without warning asked for a loan which in each case was promptly repaid by their telephonically contacted friends . The highest amount was RM 50 . Of the fate of the people in no man – land I only learned for the first time after my emigration to Holland/GPE March 1939 where I was recruited to help with a collection of funds for these victims of Nazi persecution . It was a useful learning process to be transferred from the green table to the group of anonymous helpers . Since then I regard such a collection activity as the most difficult task of any emergency campaign having always valued it as the backbone of it . I never found out how much money was collected and how it was applied as we already had to emigrate further to England/GPE at the end of August 1939 three days before the start of the other hand I was able to succeed in a different action in favour of Jewish women who were willing to work and who were looking for a possibility of emigration from Germany/GPE with the encouragement and help from Hannah Karminski and the Joodsche Frouwenrad Jewish Women Council in Holland/GPE . If the recording of my memories is to give an explanation and illumination not only to me but also to those who were not present then I will have to widen my account and give a more detailed description of the participants as well as the why and how of the task and its solution . Hannah Karminski was for many years the General Secretary and Director of the Union Office in Berlin/GPE and as such also member and secretary of the higher management whether this was since the foundation of the Jewish Women Union in Germany/GPE is not known to me as I became the founder of the local branch in Bochum/GPE and its leader only in 1926 . As favourite child and devoted friend of Bertha Pappenheim she lived entirely in the spiritual realm of this outstanding brilliant personality with all the advantages and disadvantages of such an exceptional position . Without a doubt in her thoughts and feelings stamped by the contact with such an idol despite her enthusiasm and empathy it was 10 inevitable that her own line of thought was sometimes hidden especially when decisions had to be made where the difference in age and generation played a part . Bertha Pappenheim once said to me regarding H.K. This is the young person that I have formed and she spoke justifiably regarding the result full of pride ! From the remarks above it will not be difficult for the outsider to conclude that the voluntary submission of the General Secretary to the brilliant but dominating will of a personality who at times had no responsibilities within the Union could and did lead to problems in her collaboration with the responsible union leadership especially in the prone and dangerous period from 1934 – 1939 . It is particularly because of this that I can state with greater joy and satisfaction and provide documents and letters as proof that both of us regarded our co operation as harmonious with the same purpose and fruitful in its conclusion . Hannah K. who was unmarried was taken over by the Reichsvertretung after the Jewish Women Union was dissolved . She surely represented a women union in herself . I am certain that in whatever position she found herself she always remained the representative of the interests of all women even when unsupported by a large organisation . She the beautiful imposing energetic woman was surely for any artist eye the type of Old Testament Jewish Womanhood and eternal Motherhood . She childless herself carried in her heart the destiny of all children . She refused to use the emigration visa in her passport as a means of escape . She remained in her post and died as a martyr . I generally hate the devaluation of this word for involuntary victims of inhumanity but in this case it was a voluntary offering of her own life for something she recognised as bigger and more important . Nobody can give any definite evidence for Hannah Karminski final fate . Dr. Leo Baeck told me shortly after his liberation from Theresienstadt/GHETTO Terezin/CAMP that one day the Gestapo showed him a picture of Hannah Karminski and asked Do you know this woman ? She died last night of pneumonia . It seems that she had been arrested but where and when and of what she really died Dr. Baeck never found out . A question to this effect was not harmless and simple in those days . I possess a beautiful large picture of Hannah which she gave to me before my emigration but she becomes most alive to me through her many letters suggestions and publications . 11 Particularly characteristic of her personality and method of work is a letter ostensibly addressed to me which I received in Holland/GPE 1939 . Memories of People and Events in Jewish Social Work in Hitler Germany/GPE The Jewish Women Union was forced to dissolve H.K. worked on Women Affairs within the Reichsvereinigung . She was personally in touch with many of the former colleagues in Germany/GPE and abroad collected all notifications and data and reported them to me in such a manner so as to make it an ideal circular for all concerned even though in its appearance it was a personal letter addressed to me . By repeating any information I had given her earlier she included this in her report . My husband called this document a masterpiece which militated effectively against the devilish plan of atomising our community . Then I received a request from the Reichsvertretung der Juden in Deutschland Representative Organisation of the Jews in Germany/GPE written on 4/14/1939 and signed by Prof. Cora Berliner our former vice president and Hannah Karminski to make myself available to the Jewish Women Union in Holland/GPE  Amsterdam/GPE in order to assist with the placing of 50 Jewish women and girls as domestic help in Dutch families . The Women Union had achieved the permission for immigration and work permits from the Dutch Government . This campaign naturally required thorough organisational preparation in Germany/GPE whereby the knowledge of and personal relations with our women were especially useful to the organs of the Reichsvertretung . It was important not only to consider social aspects but to examine the girls objectively for their suitability as the Jewish Women Union had had to supply certain guarantees and the failure of a single one could endanger the entire emergency action . Unfortunately this occasioned certain restrictions concerning nationality age etc . e.g. stateless persons were not admitted . The entire correspondence together with other documents from my social work in Holland/GPE which mostly relate to questions on emigration are contained in one of my files . As far as I remember there is also correspondence with Lily Montagu . Another instance of the Dutch Jewish Women Union willingness to help It was in the summer of 1934 or 1935 that we i.e. the Jewish Women Union in Germany/GPE expressed the wish to bring Jewish children of school age to Holland/GPE during the holidays for recuperation both physical and psychological . The Dutch Union declared itself willing to accommodate 250 children in families 12 or homes . For reasons of comfortable and shorter journey times and the very limited possibilities of recovery in the industrial region we decided to choose children from the Rhineland/CAMP and Westphalia/CAMP from Koblenz/CAMP to Dortmund/CAMP . We had complete freedom of choice the only thing required was a medical certificate that there was no infectious illness present . Of course we had to take into consideration requests by the host families as to gender age religious affiliation to ensure the necessary match with the individual household . Together with a representative of the Dutch Union who met with our committee at my house we dealt with all the organisational prerequisites . Interestingly the railway authorities provided a special train for us whose three wagons came together in Duisburg/LOC and that the passport office in Bochum/GPE issued a collective passport for my group whereupon the groups in the other towns had no problems in obtaining similar collective passports . I myself accompanied the transport across the border where the representatives of the Dutch Union took over the protection of the children and a representative of the government welcomed them in the name of the Queen . The joy was merely diminished by the disappointment that the Queen crown on her head was not there in person . It is tempting to lose oneself in reminiscences of many a touching or even amusing incident however in this context the only fact of interest is that such a project was only possible through the cooperation of the authorities or individual officials . The only not so pleasant corollary concerned me however with a happy end . One day at the end of the holidays I was called home from the weekly market by a breathless pointy nosed employee of my husband with the horror message The Gestapo has come to arrest you ! In reality it was an official from the passport office who rather angrily accosted me You really landed me in the soup but you can eat it yourself ! I replied that I was not fond of soup of any kind and asked him for an explanation for this scene . What had happened ? He had been criticised from above because the children holiday had not been permitted officially as I had claimed . Fortunately I was able to offer for his inspection the original permission stamped with the swastika which had been sent to our Berlin/GPE offices . Peacefully we went to my home which however did not prevent that the rumour of my arrest spread through the town with the speed of wind . After examining the document thoroughly and muttering a curse on the busybodies in 13 Berlin/GPE my friend even became interested in the outcome of the transport and I rewarded him by telling him that not one of the children gained less than 3 lb but some a lot more . Later on as expulsions continued apace it happened that some of the host families took in their children . So it came about that e.g. the son of friends of mine who both perished afterwards was saved by his former hosts . He now lives in America/GPE after learning to grind optical lenses in Holland/GPE . 14 A memory from the time of my activity as a member of the Legal Committee of the Prussian Association of Jewish Communities in Germany/GPE I must state in advance that I was the only woman on this committee which naturally consisted mostly of lawyers . The Prussian government had tasked the Association with the drawing up of guidelines for Jewish prison chaplains and this task had been passed on to the committee . As I in my capacity as member of the town council in my home town of Bochum/GPE had been involved in the local committee for prison aid and not only had worked practically as such but had also taken part in a course of specific questions of prison care and social prison aid which had equally involved the local prison chaplains the committee of the Prussian Association of Jewish Communities entrusted me with the responsibility of formulating the guidelines that were to be newly issued . There may have been guidelines for Protestant and Catholic priests before but never for rabbis . After my report it was decided to create an editing committee . I suggested a female highly suitable lawyer who lived in Berlin/GPE as did the other committee members . In response a new but very old ! member of our committee questioned why there had to be a woman on it and how it came about in the first place that a woman and to boot a non lawyer was part of the Legal Committee and in addition writing the report whereupon I replied calmly and modestly Dear Privy Counsellor that was his title I represent simple common sense . Hearty laughter from the lawyers .... and unanimous acceptance of my suggestions . P.S. Later it turned out that this Privy Counsellor Goldfeld was the father of a Frau Wachsmann nee Goldfeld Breslau/GPE who was known to me and who was a capable socially active person . He took great care to clarify that his remarks were in no way an expression of his opposition to the participation of women but that he was merely expressing his amazement . Therefore quasi a compliment ! 
personal report by Mrs Kafka formerly from Prague/GPE who was deported to the Lodz/GHETTO Litzmannstadt/GHETTO Ghetto on 19 October 1941 . Her husband Dr. jr . Emil Kafka former Kultuspraesident of the Jewish community in Prague/GPE and Grossmeister odd fellows had gone to Paris/GPE in spring 1939 in order to discuss with the American Joint a systematic Jewish emigration from Czechoslovakia/GPE . As he could not stay any longer in Prague/GPE he went via Paris/GPE to London/GPE . His wife in return had to suffer from the growing chicanes of the Gestapo and was finally sent to Lodz/GHETTO the Litzmannstadt/GHETTO Ghetto . The report includes a description of Ghetto life and management the grosse sperre before the selections for the transports took place when nobody was supposed to move from the barracks the liquidation of the Ghetto because of the approaching Russians from people in the beginning only were still alive when most people were sent to extermination camps Mrs Kafka to Auschwitz/CAMP . 8 . Further References American Joint Paris/GPE p.1 Auschwitz/CAMP p.3 5 German commander at Lodz/GHETTO von Biebow Bernsdorf/CAMP labour camp Czenstochau/CAMP Arbeitslager/CAMP p.3 Adolf Eichmann p.1 gas chambers / selections p.3 5 Guenther successor of Eichmann p.1 Litzmannstadt/GHETTO Lodz/GHETTO district where formerly criminals used to live since autumn 1939 Ghetto for Polish Jews Dr. med . Miller head of the isolation hospital murdered p.3 Judenaeltester of the Ghetto Rumkowski/GHETTO p.2 Schlechte director of the factory at camp Bernsdorf/CAMP helpful to Jews transport from Prague/GPE to Lodz/GHETTO 19 October 1941 tauschhandel barter p.2 . P.III.h . Lodz/GHETTO Litzmannstandt/GHETTO No . 30 At the time when Hitler invaded Prague/GPE 3/15/1939 Elsa Kafka husband Dr. jur . Emil Kafka was the President of Kultuspräsident and Grand Master of ‘ Odd Fellows . The Jewish City Hall was searched only a few days later . They took the passports away from Dr Kafka . The Germans demanded foreign currency for each emigrating Jew . This foreign currency was urgently needed that is why they allowed Dr Kafka to go to Paris/GPE in order to negotiate there with the American Joint . From there the foreign currency was directly sent to Germany/GPE to enable the Jews to emigrate . To create a job opportunity for Jewish emigrants Dr Kafka also had successful talks in Paris/GPE with Rothschild . He returned home on 6 August and went back to Paris/GPE on 19-Aug and from there went on to London/GPE . He did not go back to Prague/GPE . Elsa Kafka was called to see the Gestapo was called again and again and questioned . She was prohibited from leaving Prague/GPE . The Kommandant who managed the Jewish issue was called Eichmann a cruel and hard man . Mrs Kafka read in an English newspaper two or three years ago that Eichmann is in Egypt/GPE where he continued in his evil ways . Eichmann successor was Kommandant Günther . It was from him that Frau Kafka received the order to vacate her apartment as the house was confiscated for the Hitler Youth . Mrs Kafka was forced to move in with friends where she stayed for four weeks . On 19 October 41 she was sent to Lodz/GHETTO into the Ghetto . She was allowed to take 50 kilos of luggage partially walked on foot until she arrived there during a blizzard . This Ghetto Litzmannstadt/GHETTO was the former criminal quarter where Polish Jews had already been accommodated for two years completely starved and ragged figures . This Ghetto was like a small town consisting of so many wooden huts without windows and without sewerage . More than 80 people dwelt in a normal sized room . These huts were often far apart sometimes one had to walk for a while 15 minutes over a field to get to the other hut . There was also an old people home and an orphanage . The old people home consisted of six huts . There the beds were placed closely together everyone had a bed of their own . In the orphanage too each child had their own bed . They died like flies of hunger and cold . Mrs Kafka was given oversight of the old people home and then of the orphanage . She had to rise at 5 am make the coffee crossed out one was called early to the roll call then the plank beds had to be put in order and the rooms tidied up . One queued for hours to get the rations . Potato peels were a luxury . Vegetables were cooked out of beetroot peels . Mrs Kafka had to wash and mend all of the laundry . Everyone was so occupied that 2 there was no time nor energy nor sense for possible friendships . One was far too undernourished and exhausted . Mrs Kafka often worked until 12 at night . People worked hard in the Ghetto . Only the old were exempt from this . The children had to be at the workplace at 7 am already the girls in the sewing rooms the boys in a mechanical engineering workshop . There were countless factories . All kinds of things were made furniture fake flowers clothes shoes undergarments artisanal crafts and so on . One worked from 7 am to 7 pm . The cold in winter was so great that the breath from one mouth turned into icicles and lay on the neck and chin and shirt . The block eldest Chaim Rumkowsky was a clever but sadistically disposed man . He was the Ghetto absolute ruler . He thought that as long as the Jews could productively work for the Germans they would be preserved . Transports arrived incessantly . The criminal police were in the Ghetto and collected Jews who lived in Lodz/LOC on a daily basis . They were beaten terribly . The food rations which were meant to last for 14 days arrived very irregularly sometimes only after 4 weeks . They consisted of the following margarine or oil – 2 ounces sugar – 4 ounces flour – 1 pound . cabbage – 2 pounds potatoes – 1 pound . bread – 2 pounds per week . There was only horse meat – once every 6 weeks – 2 ounces . Potatoes were rare . Later there were none at all . One cooked soup from grass in Lodz/LOC until that too was forbidden because the grass was needed for the animals . For their work the Jews received Ghetto money which was only valid in the Ghetto . Mrs Kafka had not seen any coins but possessed a slip of paper which counted for 10 Marks it was later taken away from her at Auschwitz/CAMP . The Polish Jews who had been in the Ghetto since 1939 smuggled in goods from Lodz/LOC . One could buy all sorts of things for example food potatoes were 400 Marks per 1 pound . 200 Marks had to be paid for 2 pounds of bread . Mrs Kafka income however was 110 marks per month . In March ‘ 44 one could suddenly be sent 4 pound parcels . The bread arrived completely mouldy but was still eaten one put the bread into water for a few hours and then the mould floated on top of the water . Mrs Kafka was grasped by horror when she spoke about the transports . At first one knew early on when a transport was being assembled but later the Nazis came suddenly in the night and took people from their beds . One night they came and took the sick out of the hospital they were gassed in the train carriages or in Auschwitz/CAMP . The great curfew was horrible . Everyone had to remain at home all streets in the ghetto were cordoned off . Then the Germans came selected people and took them away on vehicles . One day they took children 3 who were unable to work another time old people . Some transports went to the Czenstochau Labour Camp most however to Auschwitz/CAMP . Those with transmittable diseases dysentery typhoid were put into an isolation hospital . This hospital was run by one Dr Müller . Before the liberation through the Russians Dr Müller was forced to set the hospital with all its inhabitants alight and finally he was thrown into the burning building himself . On one day in the Ghetto 7 men were hanged for a minor offence . Everyone including the children had to assemble in the courtyard and watch the procedure . The children screamed and many women fainted . During one of the great curfews one woman did not want to give them her child . It was torn from her arms taken by its tiny feet smashed with the head against the wall and thereby murdered . Thus there was always made space for newly arriving transports . When the Russians had come close to Lodz/GHETTO the ghetto was disbanded and the survivors taken to Auschwitz/CAMP . At the start there were at the time of the disbandment only were alive . All others had perished . Before this ghetto was disbanded the mayor of Lodz/GHETTO came and gave a speech The Jews are now going to the bombed out areas and must take with them everything they own . Mrs Kafka and two gentlemen belonged to the transport management . In view of what Dr Kafka had done for the Jews Chaim Rumkowsky the leader protected her . The German Camp director was called Herr von Bibow . He wanted to confuse the prisoners by giving them a letter on their way which were addressed to all German authorities in Aussig . The German authorities ought to be of assistance … . But the route led to Auschwitz/CAMP into the concentration camp . They were put into cattle waggons and arrived there at 2 am . Women and men and children . All luggage had to be left in the waggons . SS men separated the men the women and the children . Then they were chased across the Camp/STREET Street/STREET ./STREET The/CAMP concentration camp consisted of so many blocks with a courtyard each . No tree no single blade of grass anywhere . One saw nothing but emaciated figures . Some were kneeling others were leaning against the wall . They wore rags as clothes . The newly arrived were herded past them into a building . There the order came Undress ! . The clothes were thrown onto a heap and the women were led away by SS women . Stark naked . Then they came into a different block for a medical examination . Next to Mrs Kafka stood a young 23 year old girl with rather weak legs . Although she assured the doctor in return to his questions that she could work – stating that she had proven this in Lodz/GHETTO – she was declared unfit and was chased with a column of other women into the gas chambers . The others were placed under a shower and after their hair had been shorn off they were thrown some dirty rags as clothing . 4 By now it was evening and again they were herded into a different block which was built out of wood and had gates at both ends . In the middle a kind of brick bench ran from one gate to the other with troughs and taps . The female camp eldest stood up on that bench she wore a silk nightgown and spoke to them You are now in an extermination camp . Early in the mornings and in the evenings you will be called to roll call . You must stand there for many hours . Sometimes from 3 pm to midnight sometimes early from 3 am . When someone drops dead you are not allowed to stir . The female block eldest more or less had privileges . She had a small shed for herself whereas the others lay or kneeled on the concrete floor . When later plank beds were given out to sleep in 6 women lay on one plank bed feet head – feet head – feet . One lay pressed together like sardines . Sometimes one had to stand at roll call on naked clay earth . The arms lifted high and a brick in each hand . On the third day there was a special roll call . The female block eldest walked up and down saw Mrs Kafka stand at the corner or a row she walked close up to her and gave her an imperceptible push . A sign . Mrs Kafka completely instinctively ran back into the block was not noticed and thus escaped the gas chamber . The female German camp commander was called Grese a cruel beautiful woman with an angelic face . She wore a becoming grey uniform with a blue blouse . She always had a whip in her hand and hit at whomever she could reach . Mrs Kafka witnessed how she hit an older woman so much that the blood just splashed everywhere . It was a horrible experience to once watch a young woman who was highly expectant and went into labour during roll call . She stood there immovable for 3 to 4 hours in spite of the pain . She then got into the hospital but the newly born child a little boy was gassed immediately . Early at roll call one often saw the chimneys of the gas chambers smoking and it smelt of human bones . Mrs Kafka has blond hair . She assumes that this was the reason why her head was not as with most of the other women shaved completely but only cut short . She sometimes had it a little better because she did not look very Jewish . The female camp eldest even gave her a shirt as a gift . She was beaten twice . She got ill had a fever of 42 degrees but she did not call in sick but rather dragged herself on for fear of the gas chamber . After 6 weeks she came into the Bernsdorf/CAMP Labour Camp near Auschwitz/CAMP . Again only such women were selected who had not been completely shaven . In this labour camp gasmasks were made and iron traverses carried these are heavy polls with which buildings are supported when they are being built . At Auschwitz/CAMP the rags often fell from the women bodies and they had to walk around naked . It happened that when they 5 received their rations sometimes a dozen potatoes were left over . The SS women threw these potatoes randomly into the crowd these starved people grappled scratched beat each other for a potato . Then the SS shot into the crowd . Blood flowed and there again were dead people . There was no water closet but a block with latrines made of stone . Often when the rations were being handed out the jam was put onto the open hand only then came the bread and before they could eat they were chased into the latrine block . Mrs Kafka sometimes stole away at night to wash herself . One morning a doctor came selected 30 women among them Mrs Kafka they were herded into a small shower room . 20 remained there the other ten came into a small room next to it . For moment the door was opened and Mrs Kafka could see with horror that there on benches placed on top of each other naked women sat awaiting their fate . It was a gas chamber . The director of the factory in Bernsdorf/CAMP was called Schlechta he had a spinning workshop and a weaving workshop gas masks and munition were made there . In the Bernsdorf/CAMP Labour Camp were 311 female Jews . They all had to work in the different areas . Schlechta treated them decently . He even sometimes whispered to them news about the state of the war . In Bernsdorf/CAMP there was a Jewish and an Aryan dining hall in the latter were Poles French people Belgians and others who had been sent for forced labour . The director sometimes smuggled a piece of pork from the Aryan kitchen to the female Jews and each received a small piece . He was not a Nazi . For Christmas he gave all 311 women a small parcel as a present . In it were 5 small pieces of marzipan as well as a pocket mirror and a comb . These were all valuables . Schlechta had work suits made for them because it was so terribly cold there . He had even been allowed to buy clothes that had been handed over at Auschwitz/CAMP he officially bought coats for them for all 311 women . When they wanted to herd them into the country interior at the end of the war – these was known as the death marches because they died on the way from weakness or were shot – he negotiated with the SS women . In vain . At that time by chance the male Kommandant came by bike . He spoke with him for a long time and effected that the women remained where they were . He invited Mrs Kafka and her fellow sufferers to his villa in Trautenau/LOC where they were cared for and nursed by him and his wife for 4 weeks . Whether he did this to escape punishment – she could not say . He got 18 months in prison because he was in the SS . He claimed he had been coerced . 6 A small episode is still to be mentioned When Mrs Kafka one day was sitting on the balcony in Trautenau/LOC the previous workshop master of the Labour Camp came . He was called Wolf . In the camp he addressed them as follows Jewesses go over there go over here … . . Now however he said Good day madam Austrian phrasing now we are rid of the gang ! After four weeks Mrs Kafka Aryan brother in law came and took her back to Prague/GPE . When after the war Benes and his entourage left England/GPE and returned to Prague/GPE Dr Emil Kafka went too . Hence the two were reunited . But only two years later Dr Kafka died . 
description of conditions for Jews in the various places visited immediately following the liberation . The author states all the information he has gathered regarding the fate of the Jewish communities data of deportations the extent of destruction of Synagogues and cemeteries . At Gross Gerau the new Burgermaster has made the local Nazis rebuild the destroyed Jewish cemetery in the course of the Sunday morning forced labour scheme introduced by him . At the same place a returning Jew was received back royally by his former fellow members of the Reichsbanner who insisted that he should stay there . A Jew in Hamburg/GPE has told him a deportation story with a difference his was the last wedding in Hamburg/GPE before the deportations started . In 1943 the couple was taken to Theresienstadt/GHETTO where it was prohibited to have babies . Yet the woman had her baby born there and as she had scarlet fever at the time she was allowed to have it and got away with it . The husband was taken first to Dachau/CAMP and then to Auschwitz/CAMP was included with one of the notorious death marches survived and returned to Hamburg/GPE . Only a few days later his wife turned up with the baby boy by then a year old . Theirs was now the first circumcision ceremony held in Hamburg/GPE again . From his observations the author has come to the conclusion that on the whole the smaller the town the better the Jews there are now looked after because there is the personal touch about it and those in office now are usually those who were friendly to the Jews before . See related testimony P.IV.b . No . 568 for further information . Fate of Surviving Jews in some German Communities Visited by Sgt . K. Ambrose in August 1945 frankfurt/GPE A.M. Of a community of about pre war there are some 300 to 500 left including about 10 children ! . Those who have returned from various camps get the heavy workers ration allowance as in other parts of the country and all Jews I believe have received an allocation of wood for the winter . But those seem to be about the only privileges they get . The Synagogue in the Friedrichstrasse/STREET which only suffered interior damage when the Nazis burnt it in 1938 and has not suffered bomb damage has been redecorated simply and was used again for the Festivals when about 1500 American and other servicemen attended as well as all the available civilians . This I understand is the only synagogue in use in Frankfurt/GPE . The secular matters of the community are managed from the offices adjoining the synagogue . Rabbi Dr. Neuhaus who has returned from Theresienstadt/GHETTO is managing both secular and religious affairs . The community is frequently visited by ex refugee American soldiers . PFUNGSTADT . nr . Darmstadt/CAMP This little town of about 8000 or so inhabitants used to have about 10 to 20 Jewish families . There are of course none there now . However I happened to hear about there still being a synagogue so I went to investigate . I did indeed find the building which used to be the synagogue . But it showed no signs on the outside which might betray its original purpose . It had been given a large iron door on the street front to admit farm wagons as it had been used as a vegetable distributing centre . It is now locked up altogether and as I was only in the town for a few hours I could pursue the matter any further . There was a stone lying by the side wall with the year ‘ 1922 on it . Presumably that was the year the synagogue was built or inaugurated . I took two photographs of the building which I will send on when they are developed . GROSS/LOC GERAU/GPE nr . Frankfurt/GPE a./GPE M. This little town of about the same size as Pfungstadt/GPE is supposed to have had quite a flourishing Jewish community of 50 to 60 families . When we arrived in the town a few weeks ago only one Jew was left there and this was a half wit who was in an institution . The synagogue was entirely demolished by the Nazis in 1938 . The cemetery was badly knocked about by them but the new burgomaster is making the local Nazis put it back into shape in the course of the Sunday morning forced labour scheme which he has started there . Rather a remarkable little incident occurred in this town there were two young brothers Goldberger here before the war . One emigrated to America/GPE and just recently passed through the town as a lieutenant . The father was shot in Berlin/GPE and the mother died in a concentration camp . The other son who is now 26 was sent to Buchenwald/CAMP I believe in November 1938 . However he managed to escape later and got to Jugoslavia/CAMP . He was there caught by the Italians and interned in Italy/GPE . When the Allies marched in he was liberated got the status of a Displaced Person and served as Batman in the South African Army until recently his 1a unit was posted back to the Union of S. Africa . As he was only a civilian D.P. by status he could not go with them and asked to return to his home town of Gross/CAMP Gerau/CAMP which he did just while we happened to be there . According to his own account he was received ‘ royally by his old friends i.e. his former fellow members of the ‘ Reichsbanner etc . and they insisted that he should stay there . He asked to join the police force which consists of about 9 persons so that he could settle up with a few outstanding Nazis who had been dealt with yet . This was granted at once and he is now apparently happy in his job . When the present police chief retires which should be in a few years he hopes to become chief in his place and he considers that a satisfactory position as he is not ambitious . Meanwhile he is living with some friends of his where he is being treated like their own son this is again in his own words and he draws on his farmer friends in the neighbourhood for food . Apart from that the new burgomaster is a good friend of his and fixes him up with anything else he needs . He even had a house offered himself which he refused for the time being as he is better off where he is now . Sounds rather like a ‘ local boy made good story but is nevertheless TRUE . 2 WUERZBURG/CAMP There are about 50 Jews here at present of whom only 14 are ex — Wuerzburgians of an original 1500 the remainder being Poles and other Displaced Persons . The 14 are all I believe ‘ returnees from Theresienstadt/GHETTO and other camps and include the two families who were and are now again caretakers of the Jewish Cemetery . I am getting a complete list of names which will be forwarded to the Association of Jewish Refugees as soon as possible . The caretakers of the cemetary are living at the cemetary a Mr. Max Fechenbach and his whole family grandmother aged over 70 wife son of 17 and daughter of 13 years all ex Theresienstadt/GHETTO are living in the Gauleiter Rottendorfer Str . 26 where Jewish Services are also held . All the reminder I believe are living together in the Jewish hospital . There are a fair number of Jewish American soldiers including officers stationed in this town and these are looking after the community quite nicely . Nothing much is done for them officially but they seem to be getting quite reasonable assistance from these servicemen . Mr. Fechenbach is in charge of the communal affairs and is working for the Military Government . One of his tasks there is rather amusing he has to check up on the people who have suddenly discovered that they had a Jewish grandmother or even father . Among all those Jews there are only one child of 2 one . girl of 13 and a boy of 17 the latter two being Mr. Fechenbach the others being grown ups . Wuerzburg Synagogue was completely destroyed by the Nazis and a workshop erected on its site . This in turn was completely bombed out so perhaps we can build another synagogue there . Meanwhile Mr. Fechenbach is collecting money for a memorial for Jews murdered by the Fascists I am enclosing a specimen receipt . In the suburb of Heidingsfeld/LOC there is only one complete ‘ Non Aryan of Christian faith I believe left . He is Dr. Igenberg who is practising again now as a doctor and is fairly well looked after by the local authorities most of whom he knew personally before the Nazi period . It does seem on the whole that the smaller the town and the Jewish community the better the Jews there are now looked after because there is the personal touch about it and those in office now are usually those who were friendly to the Jews before . In a large town like Hamburg/GPE or Frankfurt/GPE nothing short of official regualtions will make life more pleasant for any surviving Jews and such official regulations are not usually forthcoming . I am told that the Jewish Cemetary in Heidingsfeld/CAMP was one of the oldest in Germany/GPE . It had been out of use for some years all funerals having recently taken place in Wuerzburg/CAMP itself . It is very derelict and grown over and a large number of stones are still where the Nazi hooligans left them in 1938 . However it is now being cleared up . DEPORTATION STORY WITH A DIFFERENCE I spoke to a Jew in Hamburg/GPE whose name I did not ask and who might have been 30 to 35 years old although the marks of what he had been through made him appear rather older . His was the last wedding in Hamburg Synagogue before the deportations . He and his young wife were taken to Theresienstadt/GHETTO in 1943 . It was prohibited in that camp to have children . However this couple had a baby there and somehow because the woman happened to have scarlet fever at the time and was in hospital she was allowed to have the baby and got away with it . But the husband was sent to Dachau/CAMP . From Dachau/CAMP he was sent to Auschwitz/CAMP . From there when the Allies approached they were sent on one of those death — marches which started with 7000 and finished with 2000 . Then they were liberated . 2a The man_returned to Hamburg/GPE where he found his parents in law and lived with them . He had not been there more than a few days when his wife turned up with the baby now a year old ! So going to be the first ceremony of Circumcision there . Incidentally the rescue of the whole complete family of Fechenbach mentioned above under ‘ Wuerzburg/CAMP is also quite remarkable especially as it included the old lady and since the 17 year old son served a spell at Auschwitz/CAMP towards the end where he only escaped the gas chambers by hiding in the bunkers . Dr. Igenberg also mentioned above under ‘ Wuerzburg/CAMP maintains that he owes his life to an Allied raid on Nuremberg/LOC . His being a mixed marriage his number was up until quite late in the war . Just when matters became critical we raided Nuremberg/LOC and amongst many other good jobs there destroyed the Gestapo records . Since Nuremberg/LOC Gestapo covered the Wuerzburg/CAMP area Dr. Igenberg was not thereafter troubled . 
personal report on his experiences at Dachau/CAMP and Buchenwald/CAMP June 1938 January 1939 . Interesting and detailed description of life in both concentration camps . 4 . Date October 1955 . 5 . Number of pages 4 1-Feb . 6 . Author or Source Mr H. Hager formerly of Vienna/GPE . 7 . Recorded by Dr. W. Berent . 8 . Further References a Places Vienna/GPE Buchenwald/CAMP Dachau/CAMP . b Individuals Kerll Lagerkommandant at Dachau/CAMP Wagner Sturmfuehrer at Dachau/CAMP Koch Kommandant at Buchenwald/CAMP Ilse Koch at Buchenwald/CAMP . The experiences and observations of Mr H. Hager under the National Socialists I lived in Vienna/GPE as an employee in a business . My father was a rabbi who owned a large property in Vienna/GPE which he himself administered . The builder had built into the front of the building a decoration with a large Star of David in glass . Two days later after the 11th of March 1938 when the Germans moved into Vienna/GPE a squad of SS people appeared in front of our house and smashed the glass pane with the Star of David on it . There was a lady who lived in our house who was known as a shoplifter . This woman son wore a Nazi badge although on his father side he was not a pure Aryan . One day he stood in front of our house with a rifle and said that he wanted to shoot the landlord my father . As a consequence I wrote a note to the SS and objected that young Jewish persons were running around with a rifle threatening others . The upshot was that an SS squad appeared took the rifle from him and tore off the Nazi badge . Apparently later he was recognised as Aryan and as a Nazi again . Soon after we heard that my father who was considered to be wealthy was in danger of being arrested . As a result my father went to a hiding place where he could evade the enquiries of the Nazis . As so many other Jews my mother brother and I were often conscripted to clean the streets . The deportation of Jews to concentration camps began at this time . To this end those Jews who had ever come into conflict with the law were particularly singled out . Once in 1930 without thinking I had used the discounted return ticket of another on the train . As a result of this I was prosecuted at the time but I was not fined . This affair was still in the memory of the police inspector in charge of our area . He summoned me and for no other reason I was sent to Dachau/CAMP . The same happened to a friend upon whom a very minor bicycle transgression had been imposed some time past . In the first transport to Dachau/CAMP there were a lot of prominent people ministers senior civil servants and doctors etc . I was taken on the second transport on the 2nd of June 1938 to Dachau/CAMP . The journey there was extremely unpleasant . Our custody was assigned to Bavarian SS people who hit out in the roughest manner at every opportunity . On either side of every compartment 6 prisoners sat in the 4 places . We were required to look at the ceiling light the whole time . Anyone who did not do that was beaten . We were not allowed during the whole journey of 26 hours to go to the toilet . Also it was worse because we had no idea where we were going . In Munich/GPE we were loaded into cattle waggons . During the difficult climb into the waggons which were later sealed many of us were beaten . As a result some suffered leg fractures . A certain Walter Hand who was hard of hearing was shot when he misunderstood an order and carried it out incorrectly . After our arrival at Dachau/CAMP we had to go through a column of SS men armed with rifles and machine guns who shot into the air as part of the process of intimidating us . As a result some of us received grazes from shots . Even an SS man was accidentally shot during this affair . The next day was a day of rest for us because the SS had to attend the funeral of their comrade who was shot . On the day after we all had to strip naked and were then led to the showers . When I attempted to grasp the soap in order to use it I was hit because I wanted to use it . After I had washed without the soap I was beaten again because I did not use it . In this way everything occurred as a pretence in order to torment us . Sturmführer Wagner behaved especially badly in this . After the shower our heads were shorn and we received camp clothes with certain badges . I had to wear on my items of clothing the red yellow Jewish badge . Then the camp commander Kerll gave us a speech in which he said nothing would happen to those who behaved properly but those who did anything wrong would be severely punished . Afterwards we were lined up in rows of 6 and it was announced that every thirtieth person would be shot . We were counted and every thirtieth man was pulled out . The men who were withdrawn were led to a field nearby . As it later transpired it was again only an attempt to intimidate us . After that the people came back to us without anything happening to them . The barracks in which we were accommodated comprised two sections . One part served as a dining room whilst the other was the sleeping area . There were bunk beds in the latter and there were 60 prisoners in my room . We were wakened at 5 in the morning and had to be out of bed in seconds in order to avoid being reported by the SS guard . Making the bed was an especially difficult affair . The blankets had to be dead straight and lying without any creases . Generally you could see a lot of cleanliness and order . Every prisoner had to shave daily . After making the bed we had to march off in strict military fashion to get some coffee . There was a weekly bread ration . The rest of the food was bearable . At 6 there was the register and count on the assembly ground . The individual sections were reported by their Kapos . After this followed the marching off to work . In the main the work consisted of road building . We participated in the extension of a motorway . If there was no work to hand they had us carry stones to make a pile and after we had to carry them back again . The other works to which I was consigned were sweeping the courtyard with a brush and planting flowers and then watering them from a can which was very heavy to carry . The treatment meted out by the SS guards during this to keep us on our toes varied . We were often beaten during the work . To go to the toilet you had to report in a special manner . It was prescribed for this purpose that we may not come closer than 6 metres to an SS man . A well known businessman who contravened this regulation was shot by an SS guard . The entire camp was constructed as a large square . First of all it was protected by a ditch then by an electrified barbed wire fence and finally by a wall upon which there were a number of machine gun tours . It was a rule that anyone who was spotted in the ditch would be shot . One day I was working with others about 1 metre away from the ditch . We had to bring a wheel barrow full of gravel to the ditch and unload it . By and by a hillock of gravel developed which in the end was overlain with planks which we had to go up with our wheel barrow in order to unload it . In doing this a prisoner fell over with his wheel barrow and pushed me into the ditch . At any moment I expected that I would be shot at . The SS man in charge had apparently given a sign not to shoot at me . I was pulled out of the ditch with help from a rope and because I was half unconscious through fear taken away in a wheel barrow . I stayed for 4 months in Dachau/CAMP . Then we all were to be transferred . We had to give up the clothing which we wore and we were supplied in return with completely torn clothing . Wearing this we marched off . We were all very depressed because during our stay we had become used to Dachau/CAMP and did not know what was going to happen to us . We were loaded onto the railway and arrived in Weimar/CAMP via Jena/LOC . Here we had to get out and we were marched through the city accompanied by SS men with drawn revolvers to buses which took us to the Buchenwald/CAMP concentration camp . From the beginning Buchenwald/CAMP made a very poor impression on us . They camp was not completely built and it was extremely dirty . In every respect it was much worse than Dachau/CAMP . In the barracks there were three beds one upon the other and the rooms were extremely crowded . The food was in no way sufficient and the cutlery was rusty . Water was scarce and there were only open latrines there . In addition proper supervision did not exist . Common criminals who had been imprisoned as such were appointed as Kapos in the individual barracks . They treated Jewish prisoners very badly and often doled out beatings . It became especially bad after Kristallnacht on the 10th of November 1938 when around 13000 Jews were brought into the camp . Many of these came in already badly beaten up and were further mistreated in the camp . The crowding in the camp now became terrible and also the food was scarcer than before . The guards here also tormented us to extremes . They always sought out new things to make our lives unbearable . For example they forced us to ride piggy back and chivvied the pairs against each other . The consequences for us were often bloody heads and other injuries . Once two prisoners escaped . One was caught soon after and immediately hanged . The second succeeded in fleeing to Czechoslovakia/GPE . Later he was brought back from there and likewise hanged . On the occasion when the two prisoners escaped we all had to report in the evening to the parade ground and stand outside the entire night in a temperature of minus 32 degrees . 33 prisoners died the next day from exhaustion . Later the number of the dead increased . The commander of the camp was the infamous Koch . I had nothing to do with him and so I can not report anything about him . However I was once commanded to carry out cleaning work in his villa which lay 10 minutes from the camp and whilst doing this met his wife Ilse Koch . I can not say that she treated badly either me or those colleagues with whom I carried out the work . Worth mentioning though is that an orchestra was formed from prisoners who had to play marches soldiers songs and other pieces as prisoners went off to work and when they returned . The which was the internee Rainer Huppert poem set to music by Leopoldi another internee was especially popular . The camp commandant himself always wanted to hear that song . I include a copy of the song and one of another song from a different camp . I would like to state an opinion contrary to that expressed by some former inmates of Dachau/CAMP and Buchenwald/CAMP that it had not been so bad there like it was claimed by an 80 year old man who was incarcerated with me . This man enjoyed special treatment because of his age treatment not granted to anyone else . He was in a barrack which was under the command of the Kapo Brandel who was formerly a communist member of parliament . Brandel looked after the man and arranged that he was released from any work and also organised a collection of money for him . My stay in Buchenwald/CAMP ended on the 13th of January 1939 . In response to my request I had received an entry visa for England/GPE and as a consequence I received my release from the camp . With a group of others who were equally fortunate I left there and reached England/GPE without any further mishaps . 1 Buchenwald/CAMP song 
personal report by Mrs L. Picker on her experiences first in Vienna/GPE 1938 1942 and later in Eastern/CAMP Concentration Camps where she was separated from both her husband and daughter of whom she never heard again . 4 . Received 17 August 1955 . 5 . Number of pages 6 . Language German . 6 . Author or source as above . 7 . Recorded by Dr. W. Berent . 8 . References Guttava Riga/GHETTO Ghetto Kaiserwald/CAMP Spilve hut camp Stutthof/CAMP Tambo Russian Hospital . murder of children p.4 . 9 . Remarks Mrs Picker owes her life to the Russians not on account of the liberation itself but because of the wonderful treatment by their doctors and nurses . She spent a whole year in the Russian hospital . Erlebnisse und Erfahrungen unter Nationalsozialistischer Herrschaft I am an Austrian citizen and lived in Vienna/GPE together with my family . My husband had been an employee of the Laenderbank state bank in Vienna/GPE and received a state pension from the bank . With the support of my husband I ran a textile manufactory and purchased the produced goods to resellers . When the German troops occupied Vienna/GPE in 1938 restrictive regulations for the Viennese Jews were legislated very soon after . They were only allowed to show themselves publicly in the streets until 4 in the afternoon they were not allowed to visit theatres cinemas or cafés . Especially from 1940 onwards the regulations against the Jews were intensifying . They were forced to wear the Judenstern yellow star badge and to give up their homes if they were not in the vicinity of the/LOC Second/LOC Viennese/LOC District/LOC and to move to this District/LOC . The vast number of Jews living there were coerced into providing rooms in their own homes to their coreligionists from other districts . It was often the case that Jews regardless of their age or social standing were forced out of their accommodations to carry out road cleaning works . At the same time they boycott of Jewish businesses began . Until 1940 our personal situation as well as the situation of our business had been halfway bearable . Then one day some people appeared who told us that they allegedly were ordered to scrutinize our firm books of account . Some days later they declared to us that they had received the order to take over our business . We had to give them the keys and were coerced into surrendering our business including the available goods in stock all of the machines cutting tables etc . to them . They claimed that we were to receive a compensation . However we never got anything . Fortunately my husband still had his state pension which he was receiving at least temporarily since the Laenderbank was a French business . We were subsisting solely on that pension . The small apartment in the/LOC Second/LOC District/LOC which we had to move in to was conducive to minimizing the living expenses . Apart from that there was not much available for us to buy anyway . Jews did not receive Kleiderkarten ration cards for clothing hence we were denied the chance of complementing our wardrobe by necessary clothes and pieces of laundry . In 1940 the deportation of the Viennese Jews began . The first transports went to Poland/GPE . Usually the deportees were notified one week in advance . Sometimes they were also taken out of their homes without prior notification . Every person was allowed to take 50 kg of luggage with them . One was granted permission to carry valuable items such as money and jewelry but it was taken from the owners in the Sammellager/LOC transit camp in exchange for a certificate which contained the promise of return upon arrival at the destination . However this promise was never kept . In the winter of 1942 our fate was sealed . We were living together with our 22 year old daughter . We had been able to send our son to England/GPE before . One day three Gestapo men came to our apartment . They informed us that were to be deported and helped us pack the necessary things . I had to organize a vehicle for the transport of the luggage and then the three men escorted us to the Sammellager . We stayed there for a week without coming to know anything about where we were going to be brought . The Jewish community provided us as well as many of our fellow sufferers with food for the coming transport . After one week we were taken to the train in trucks . Having arrived there we were loaded on to cattle cars under strict surveillance and departed for a destiny unknown to us . Our travel time amounted to five days and four nights and we did not receive water or food during that time . We had to make due with the food we had gotten from the Jewish community . At last and in an indescribable condition we arrived in Riga/GHETTO . In Riga/GHETTO we were handed over to the Latvian Police who treated us in an extremely brutal way . After we had gotten off the train we firstly had to surrender all of our hand luggage and in case we had some left our food . Our bigger items of luggage which as we had been told would be packed into baggage cars had remained in Vienna/GPE . Next we were ordered to walk to the Riga/GHETTO ghetto near the city boundary . The route led through deep snow and took us more than four hours . The guarding Latvian police officers were equipped with rubber truncheons and pressured us mercilessly . Many of us were incapable of enduring the march . The ones who could not walk on were left lying in the snow . We were prohibited to help the ones left behind . I do not know what happened to them . We had been robbed of our entire clothes beforehand . In Riga/GHETTO they had guarded us to a bath where we had to undress . Nazimaedels Nazi girls were standing there and took our clothes . We received old worn out rags in exchange which we had to put on . The particular district which had been modified as a ghetto had been the residential area of wealthy Jews from Riga/GHETTO . I learned that two to three days prior to our arrival the Latvians had slew those inhabitants who had not fled . All of the apartments were standing open and had been looted . A large number of furniture was standing in the streets . We set up in the apartments as good as possible . A high fence surrounded the whole district holding about 1000 internees . SS men guarded the entrance area of the ghetto . A SS officer was the commandant of the ghetto . During the first days we did not receive any food until a committee of internees formed and organized some bread coffee and sugar . Then we were divided up for work . The daily schedule was as follows we were woken up at four o clock in the morning . The roll call started at half past 6 . Afterwards we got our breakfast black coffee substitute and a ration of bread with which we had to make due for the entire day . Later the SS men brought us to our working place . The work we had to do was extremely hard . Regardless of the weather we had to carry bricks cement and boards . We also had to carry out work for the construction of airfields trenches and bunkers as well as cutting trees . At about six we were brought back into the ghetto . There we usually got a bowl of potato soup which rarely contained a potato and sometimes some margarine . There was a strict code of discipline . Sometimes compassionate passers by would try to give us money or bread during our marches . It was strictly forbidden to accept what was offered . We were searched for possible goods of that kind each time we arrived at the ghetto . Every person carrying money or food was severely punished . Obviously For that reason some of the men were hanged . Their bodies were presented publicly for everybody to see for three days . Every one of them carried a piece of cardboard around the neck which read This is what will happen to anybody who hides money or food . We were also threatened that ten of us would be shot should anybody try to escape . When half a year was over all of the men first the older ones and later on the younger ones were removed from the ghetto . It was said that they were to work in a remote area for six weeks . My husband was among the men . Since then I have never again heard anything from him . Some months later the older women were transferred I was among them . I had to leave my daughter in the ghetto which as I learned was closed sometime after that . Since then her whereabouts have remained unknown to me . I was sent to the concentration camp Kaiserwald/CAMP . The circumstances in that camp were similar to those in Riga/GHETTO . We had to work very hard which among other things involved carrying bricks lime slaking digging trenches and sorting potatoes . We also had to transfer heaps of sand but due to a lack of tools we were forced to shovel the sand into linen sheets with our bare hands and to carry the full sheets over our shoulders to the place directed . Our guards were women imprisoned for murder or other severe criminal offences they were very cruel to us . The food was comparable to what we got in Riga/GHETTO but here we sometimes received boiled fish heads in addition . Like in Riga/GHETTO people were shot as a punishment . Other punishments especially for stealing potatoes were pouring cold water over an inmate outside in the winter cold cutting of their hair or having them sleep on the bare stone floor during the winter . Apart from that we had old mattresses to sleep on and a blanket for two to three people . After some time I was sent to the concentration camp Stutthof/CAMP . An electric barbed wire fence surrounded this camp . SS men beat us up a lot there but we did not have to work . During the four weeks that I was in this camp a great number of old people was taken away no one found out anything about their remain . My next station was the barrack camp Spilve . I had to work very hard again dig trenches and work on turnip and potato fields . One day when the women were at work outside of the camp all of the children who until then had been accompanied by the women of the camp and who stayed in the camp while their mothers were at work were seized and taken away . About three months later I was sent to Guttava/LOC which I suppose lies in the/LOC Polish/LOC Corridor/LOC because Polish inhabitants lived in the villages nearby . It consisted of ten big barracks and about one thousand female inmates . The barracks stood on the bare ground the floor was meagerly covered with straw and there were no heating systems . We neither had the possibility to wash nor clean ourselves . The work was about the same as before . Many of us internees became ill and died many suffered from typhus . Those women lived in a special barrack which was never entered by the SS people . There was no doctor sick people were left to fate . One of the interned women regularly brought some coffee into the barrack . I caught typhus too and came into the barrack I lay there for a while without receiving any sort of treatment . One day we noticed that the women who had provided us with coffee did not come anymore . Although we looked for her we could not locate her or any of her moves in the camp . Meanwhile some Poles from the village came to us and told us that the SS had left the camp with the remaining internees and that it was completely empty . They expected the arrival of the Russians any day this was in the spring of 1944 . The village people were very nice to us they brought us coffee and invited us to their houses if we were capable of leaving the barrack . Then the Russians came . They were shocked to find us in the given condition and appalled by the situation in the camp . They told us that they had never seen anything like that in their lives . From then on they made sure that we got the best treatment and care . We were taken out of the barracks and brought to the houses of nearby farmers . Russian nurses came bathed the very sick cut off their hair and truly cared for them . From the Russian field kitchens we got only the best food which we had not had for such a long time and meat we had had to do without for years . We were in constant medical care of doctors who made sure that we lived in warm rooms . Russian officers of higher rank were also eager to help . I can only say that the Russians saved my life . After some weeks I was brought to the hospital of Tarnow/GPE Russia/GPE . I stayed there for one year and enjoyed the luxury of sleeping in a decent bed and of being served marvelous food . The Russians issued us papers of legitimation and gave us clothes and shoes as well . After some time we were eventually allowed to return to the places that we had come from . I went back to Vienna/GPE where I spent one year attempting to find my son in England/GPE . I finally located him with the help of the Joint . I had my son request me and immigrated to England/GPE in 1946/47 . 
author of the report a Dutch political prisoner arrived in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP on 10 February 1945 with a transport of about prisoners from Sachsenhausen/CAMP . He was to be executed because the SS had found out that as head of the Political Department in Sachsenhausen/CAMP which had the task to register newly arrived prisoners he had saved many prisoners from execution by substituting their names for others who were already dead . Of the prisoners the SS had singled out for execution most had been shot in Sachsenhausen/CAMP in the Industriehof . But the executions were interrupted by an air raid alarm and the last group of 21 whose hames began with one of the last letters of the alphabet were sent by Erdmann the commander of Sachsenhausen/CAMP with other prisoners to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP to be executed there . The German journalist Rudolf Kuestermeyer was a member of this group . In Belsen/CAMP typhus was rampant . The SS therefore confined itself to guarding the camp but did not enter it . The registration of new arrivals was done by prisoners . Some knew Zwart who had helped them in Sachsenhausen/CAMP . In return they arranged for Zwart group to be administratively dead by listing them as having died on the transport while giving them names of prisoners who had really died . Most of the prisoners died from typhus or starvation prisoners who were allowed to get parcels were often murdered by the block elders who then kept the parcels . There were cases of cannibalism . Shortly before the Allies arrived when the SS regime was already disintegrating Zwart was elected senior camp leader . When the British arrived on 15 April he asked them to feed the prisoners with boiled rice . Instead they got corned beef and some prisoners slaughtered the pigs of the SS and distributed the meat . As a result prisoners died from overeating during the first days after the liberation . More over the British left the Hungarian SS who had guarded the camp on duty with their arms for three days . Not until they had killed 41 people by firing into the camp could the British be persuaded to disarm them . Neither the British with the exception of Derrick Sington nor an American film team which arrived soon afterwards had any idea about the nature of the SS and the National Socialist regime . The Last Days of Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP Joop Zwart imprisoned for political reasons was during the last couple of years of his stay in Sachsenhausen/CAMP the Vorarbeiter of the Politische Abteilung . This Abteilung consisted of prisoners only . They had to register the prisoners when brought in and had access to all the files of the prisoners . With the influx of prisoners this department worked in and night shifts . In his capacity as head of it Zwart had managed in the course of years to manipulate a number of things . So for instance whenever a prisoner was brought in the camp and his file contained a death warrant resp . at a later date the order was received by the Reichssicherheits Hauptamt that the prisoner had to be executed Zwart tried as often as possible to prevent the actual killing of the prisoner involved by writing that he had already died because of typhus or an accident whatever cause of death the Political Department had at that moment available . Now at the end of January 1945 with the Soviet troops in full offensive and rumoured to be in Frankfort/LOC at the Oder there came an order from the Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler and the Reichssicherheitshauptamt that in the CC Sachsemhausen/CAMP as a measure of intimidation a number of prisoners were to be shot . Among them was a large group of policemen from Luxemburg/GPE the British of the command raid at Rjukan/CAMP in Norway/GPE French officers etc . This special committee of the RSHA installed itself in the room of the Politische Abteilung and went through the files . The members of the commando were not allowed to enter . Apparently this committee found out that there had been quite a lot of swindling fake correspondence destroying of death warrants and other manipulations been done and for that reason put Zwart on the list of those to be shot as well as his brother who had not anything to do with it and the Dutch professor Telders who was a close friend of Zwart and working with him at the political department and since he was a renowned jurist helping to clean files . Zwart name however starts with a Z so he was one of the last persons on the list . When all night through various groups always consisting of 26 prisoners had been brought to the Industriehof to be shot shortly before the group in which Zwart was the last batch were to be brought through the gate to the execution stand the Royal Air Force raided Berlin/GPE . So there was air raid warning and the shooting stopped . The raid took a very long time . It seems that then the commando in charge of the execution started deliberating and apparently the commander of Sachsemhausem camp Erdmann who did not like this affair fearing the Russians who were 2 advancing rapidly would make him responsible managed to convince this special commission that it would be better to have the remaing death candidates transported to another camp . So they were put in the bunker stayed there for a few days . It was intended to send them to Buchenwald/CAMP this was changed into an order to send them to Belsen/CAMP with the explicit order for Kramer to have them executed there . This was also the reason why this small group to which belonged a British officer Keith Williams under special . guards was with the transport Mr Zwart has described in the following statement . In this transport there was a.o . also Mr Rudolf Küstermeyer now correspondent of D.P.A. in Israel . Of these 21 persons only a few survived . Professor Telders died a few days before liberation of Belsen/CAMP due to typhus Keith Williams likewise . 3 In the early morning hours of February 10th 1945 a freight train entered the small station of Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP . The trip from Oranienburg/CAMP near Berlin/GPE to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP about 200 km to the west had taken two days . The Belsen camp was to the memory and partly hearsay knowledge of a large number of my fellow inmates a much better camp for they thought it to be an internment camp from which groups of internees got permission from the Third Reich authorities to go abroad especially to Portugal/GPE . Among the large group of prisoners who arrived at the Bergenstation that morning there were a few who knwe Belsen by own experience . They had been there earlier and many of the prisoners who during the as a group of prisoners usually was called had listened enviously to their tales of those days about the circumstances there were happy at the prospect of going for the last part of the war to a camp where the conditions seemed to be bearable . I myself was not convinced of these so called advantages of Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP for during my work at the Politische Abteilung Political Department i.e. Registration Dept of the Sachsenhausen/CAMP Concentration Camp I had found out repreatedly that Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP was considered as a genuine concentration camp and that the conditions there were accordingly . This notwithstanding I was happy that the transport went to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP instead of going to Buchenwald/CAMP which was its original destination . Compared with Buchenwald/CAMP the Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP camp had at least the advantage of being nearer to the Dutch frontier . 4 Immediately after arrival we had to get out and form rows of four prisoners illegible . After some quarrelling and ado finally a column of about a thousand prisoners was formed all coming from the Sachsenhausen/CAMP concentration camp . In this column of a thousand people our group the one I was belonging to was a special group . It consisted of 21 prisoners . We were specially guarded during the trip as well . This privilege was due to the fact that our group of 21 men from the Sacnhsehausen/CAMP camp had escaped imminent execution because during the night 196 previous executions took place and while we were waiting to be brought to the Industriehof to be shot the Royal Air Force made an air raid over Berlin/GPE . Consequently the executions were stopped . Our group of 21 was so to say the last page of the order for special treatment consisting of six pages which meant death for those concerned . With the typical German orderliness our names had been typed alphabetically on those six pages and so it happened that those whose names begin with the last characters of the alphabet escaped the bullets at that time . After this airaid the Sachsenhausen/CAMP camp and the nearby village Oranienburg/CAMP was full of rumours that Russian tanks had been seen near Küstrin/CAMP . These rumours caused the highest SS officers to withdraw from Sachsenhausen/CAMP to Berlin/GPE whereas the remaining SS officers of the lower charges just did not have the courage to finish the last page of this special order . So with a special instruction of the commander of the CC Sachsenhausen/CAMP to the commander of the CC which was our destination we were sort of distinguished and it was 5 quite certain to all of us that this special advice would have the saddest consequences for all of us . Our group consisted of three Norwegians three Dutchmen four Italians two Frenchmen one Englishman two Ozechs and six Poles . We were awaiting execution if not something would happen . On arrival at the station we got special guarding but during our march to the camp it became clear to us that the guards who were marching with us were worrying about other things than giving all their attention to guarding us . After having marched about five quarters of an hour I sniffed the air rather deeply for my nose had been warning me already for some time that there was a peculiar smell around . This smell reminded me of an episode at the front during the Spanish Civil War . It was that peculiar sweetish smell of decaying corpses . To the Dutch professor B.M. Telders walking next to me I muttered I do think it looks a bit well for I smell death and corpses . On which remark Professor Telders sniffed himself deeply and answered Yes indeed the smell is most atrocious quite some stink . After more than twenty minutes marching illegible we arrived at a cluster of nice looking barracks . They were situated at the grounds just outside the camp . We walked on to the entrance and the whole transport was admitted to the camp surrounded by the high barbed wired walls so typical for the German concentration camp system . The moment however our column had entered the camp it somehow all of a sudden disintegrated . The SS guards accompanied our column to the main campstreet the Lagerstrasse/STREET from there large contingents of our transport were directed to the entrance of another barbed wired compound . Within this wired enclosure we were at home according to SS ideas . 6 There were two camps next to another . A little farther on there were another two camps called as we learnt later the Hungarian camps still being considered as the original internment camps . In the latter two camps there were Hungarians Slowaks Dutchmen Poles and Frenchmen housed that is to say that these camps only differed in so far from the genuine camp that the prisoners in the internment camp were housed much worse than those in the real camp if that was possible at all . Especially in the second Hungarian camp the situation was most dreadful here there was a lack of barracks so the prisoners were lodged in tents . On the opposite side of the main street the barbed wirefences of the two women camps began . These women camps were a wee bit better as far as the equipment was concerned than the mens camps . The barracks were as a whole a little better However for all who had thought that Belsen/CAMP would be much better than the previous camps they had gone through Belsen/CAMP was a terrible disappointment . At arrival with in the fenced compounds we had to be registered anew . This was a procedure that was repeated with every new transport of prisoners . There were prisoners who had been in twenty different camps so they had been registered twenty times . Based on this registration the various offices within the camp made a new file so that every prisoner appeared on card indexes and lists at least eighty times . The disintegration of the SS apparatus caused by the military dissolution made the number of registrations the prisoners were submitted diminish rapidly so during the last weeks in Belsen/CAMP it was even possible to escape registration altogether . With our transport however the serious attempt was made to put all of us on a file . This gave us the unique chance that eventually saved the life of a few us . In the 7 department prisoners were employed . The Belsen registration dept . consisted of prisoners only for the SS had already at that time withdrawn from the camp registration and administration to a large extent . Not because this registration could do without the SS control but because of the danger that the SS guards would catch lice a danger which was so great that a categorical order was issued by the camp commander that SS guards should keep a distance of at least 5 meters from the prisoners because of the dangers of contamination . In the camp there was a typhus epidemic The whole Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP complex consisting of six departments in fact was inhabited by millions of lice living on a diet consisting of about prisoners . The accomodation in the camp however was planned for a population of . Although regular roll calls were held nobody neither the prisoners nor the SS were able to say how many prisoners exactly were in the camp . Of course there existed administrative estimates and statistics but insiders knew that no figure whatsoever was correct . Between the real number of inmates of a concentration camp and the official figures even in more orderly camps such as Sachsenhausen/CAMP Buchenwald/CAMP and Dachau/CAMP there were differences and discrepancies as a result of irregularities in the administration . In the Belsen/CAMP camp the difference was figured out at being a couple of hundred . This now was our chance . I knew that our little group was destined to be shot . Frank to the circumstance that I found in the registration department some fellow prisoners whom I previously in Sachsenhausen/CAMP had been able to help I succeeded in making a deal with them that they would administratively let die the members of our group . 8 Of the approximately thousand men who had left the CC Sachsenhausen/CAMP at the beginning of our journey to Belsen/CAMP about 40 had succumbed during the trainride and the march to the camp . This now made it possible to use the numbers of these succumbed prisoners as well as their names since ascertaining the identity of the prisoners who had died was wholly left to the prisoners working in the registration department . So by and by the members of our group were given in the card index and files of the camp other names and numbers namely those of the deceased prisoners . Although the prisoners who knew me and were aware that we were designed to be shot somehow were suprised that the execution was not performed we could not divulge to them the secret of our still living . So I for instance lived during the last months of the camp officially under the name of Leo Verdonschot and was wearing his prisoner number whereas my friends called me with my own name . They suspected something but for tactical reasons nobody asked or talked about the matter . Officially I as I could ascertain from documents found years after the liberation died at March 6 1945 due to typhus . The difference between the date I was inscribed in the files as having died and the date we decided to let me die must be explained . Due to the disastrous conditions in the camp every night about 500 to 600 prisoners died . That does not mean they died indeed during the night they just were found dead in the morning . However there was already during some time a large scale swindling as far as the reporting to the SS was concerned . A of the barrack who had at night roll call still 300 living prisoners in his block could reckon for the morning roll call at as many portions of bread as he had living prisoners then . For the senior it was also under certain circumstances a good thing to manipulate the number of deceased . This was done on a large scale . For those who died after 9 rollcall one portion of food could be obtained during the very day . That was the reason that in the camps in the Third Reich and this even happened in some jails there was a comparatively large group of dead who were counted as living beings . Of course these dead could could not appear at roll call so they were reported as being seriously ill and it all depended whether the medical control was defunct enough to manage to go through with this manipulation . In Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP the number of dead souls amounted to appr . 600 that is at the moment that I got insight in the administrative affairs this number kept growing . The prisoners working at the registration department knew very well that more than 600 portions of food were being distributed for people who were not alive but they themselves profited from this circumstance for they got their share of these portions so it was in their own interest to let these dead souls exist as long as was possible . With the deterioration of the situation and the increase of the number of deaths all sorts of mistakes occurred at the identification of the deceased so that the administration at last had chosen to wait a bit with reporting somebody as having died so that corrections could take place . For it happened too often that somebody was reported having died who just had not yet though he was in coma . Then reports had to be changed again and such correction caused a lot of red tape . So with silent consent pf the SS due to this system of FALSE system a born . That is why I could officially illegible being reported dead on March 6th though we had decided that I should be dead as from February 18 on . Once installed in the camp and freed of the worry that we still could be fetched for shooting I got more opportunity to look into the affairs of my prisoners . I had come 10 as a prominent prisoner from Sachsenhausen/CAMP and some sort of a camp codex was that then you were treated as such in the other camps as well . This meant certain privileges . Though I was ill when I left Sachsenhausen/CAMP jaundice I did not feel terribly bad when I came to Belsen/CAMP . Nevertheless the Camp senior Lageraelteste had white bread brought to me and I accepted it . It was quite certain that other prisoners needed this more than I but in the camps the conditions there could not be measured with the moral standards of a free society . I knew that if I had refused the white bread this would not have gone to prisoners needing it more . In each camp especially in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP the rule governed first me and then the others . Nobody could afford to help first somebody else with a thing he himself needed most . Still with more solidarity among the prisoners it is my conviction that many more thousands could have been saved . But it seemed as if the people in the camps did their very best to shed their best qualities as quickly as possible for their very worst qualities . So not only envy but betrayal and worse reigned . In Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP there were a few hundred internees who simply by administrative measure had been put in the camp . The Gestapo however intended to put them in an internment camp not in a regular concentration camp . Since these camps in the course of time got so mixed up that in practice they were all considered as belonging to the same type it did not make much difference in which department one was put . Formally however there was some difference as to the rights and privileges of the internees . In reality all of them just were submitted to the same conditions and suffering . Of these some hundred internees however during my stay in 11 Belsen thirty and more were killed by their fellow prisoners . These internees were allowed to receive parcels . Whenever a parcel for an internee illegible arrived in camp the block senior or his assistant had to fetch the parcel hand it out to the prisoner involved and deliver the signed receipt at the postal department . Only in case the addressee had died the very day the parcel was received the block senior of his assistant was allowed to keep the parcel for himself resp . decide what to do with it . The consequence of this rule was however that those entitled to receive a parcel were murdered in cold blood . Because of their special powerful position the Blockaeltesten had in a concentration camp these murders could be committed without punishment . The education was being done by the block seniors or their assistant or help who simply made certain that a prisoner had died . Then the corpse was without any ceremonies put on a cart and brought to the cemetery . The crematorium could not due to too large influx take care of all the bodies so that it was decided to dig large pits called mass graves . However the burying of the dead could not keep up with the tempo . When I entered Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP the capacity was 300 to 400 corpses a day . However there often ocurred 500 deaths a day . The result was that in all the parts of the camp huge piles of corpses lay about . In the first week of April 1945 before liberation a Strafkompagnie of the Wehrmacht was mobilised and had to dig enormous graves . At a certain moment there were 2000 corpses lying around . Everything in the camp smelled of corpses the bread the blankets the indescribable stench penetrated everything . Most of the prisoners succumbed due to typhus . Also until the very last moment large groups of prisoners were put on transport to another camp . Many of these groups did not reach their destination . A few were liberated by 12 allied troops others liquidated by the SS . The number of inmates of the camp varying between and remain rather constant since for those who left other groups came from other camps . From Sachsenhausen/CAMP only during February 1945 prisoners were sent to Belsen/CAMP . Later the commanders of other camps such as Neuengamme/CAMP and Buchenwald/CAMP send large groups of prisoners to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP whereas only small groups left Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP . A steady contingency of leaving prisoners however were those 500 prisoners who died due to exhaustion and illness . On the evening of April 10th 1945 we saw that there were changes in the system of the SS guarding . A rumour had it that a transport from Dora/CAMP an annex camp of the CC Buchenwald/CAMP at the last moment had been redirected and housed in Wehrmachtbarracks near the Belsen/CAMP camp . Also a group of jewish prisoners who had been put on transport that morning returned since apparently communications had been broken . This of course resulted in a feeling of alarm . In the early morning hours of April 11 1945 a meeting was held in the camp of those prisoners fit enough to keep themselves on feet . It was no must to attend the meeting he who wanted to come could come others stayed away . In this consisting of about 60 prisoners it was discussed which measures we should take if the SS would decide to stage a Bartholomews Night . We decided to build hiding places in the barracks under the cots . For that the floor of the barracks had to be torn apart and a sort of shallow foxholes could be dug . At our first attempts to do so however we found out that such work was too much for our weak forces . During another gathering later in the morning we concluded that the SS at the utmost could try to put fire to the camp by shooting for the millions of lice reigning in the camp 13 formed a sanitary cordon . The SS would not dare to penetrate the camp . At this meeting I was elected general senior camp leader with the order to deal with the Allies whose arrival we were awaiting daily . It was significant for the situation in the camp that the senior prisoner officially appointed by the SS a professional criminal accepted my election to senior prisoner and declared that he would loyally cooperate . We were not very happy about this statement however we could not risk offering him at that moment which we would have done if we had declared that as far as we were concerned he could go and beat it . On the contrary during the first days after my election it seemed necessary to ask his advice etc . About noon on April 11 1945 after we had ascertained more information about the position of the SS I proposed an experiment in order to find out to what extent the SS still possessed absolute powers and wanted to apply these . For this I suggested to go with an Hungarian boy whom we had caught several times committing cannibalism to the officer in charge and to tell that officer that this boy had cut parts from corpses . It was an experiment for usually the verdict was beating until death . However it was my opinion which was confirmed by other prisoners that we should risk this experiment . So I went with the boy who was wholly out of his mind and had not the slightest idea what was happening to the officer SS in charge . At a distance of five meters from the barbed wire with this secure fence between us the SS officer listened to my tale . Then he asked what I wanted . I replied I want to know what to do with this boy . The SS officer replied thereupon Do what you like with him . That nothing of my concern . 14 At that moment I could have jumped with joy for this meant that the SS did not have absolute power any more and could not use it according to their illegible . I controlled myself however and slowly walked away with the boy . My friends were waiting impatiently and full of tension but when I told them what the officer had replied there was a timid hurrah . The others as well understood imediately that the Reich of the SS was finished . The days that now followed were fraught with tension . We felt liberated already but still the barbed wire was there and on the watch towers the SS guards were heavily armed yet we felt strong enough to request from the SS that the camp doctor the man who previously had decided and committed selection at Auschwitz/CAMP issued extra food portions especially for the children . What we expected happened indeed . Two days previously this would have been impossible . The camp doctor complied with our request and ordered the issue of condensed milk . That settled things . We knew that the SS only was prepared to do this because it did not have power any more thus there was a higher power and that only the allies our allies could be . On April 15 1945 a British armoured car drove in . On this there was a loudspeaker from which a warm voice speaking German slowly with a heavy British accent told us that we were liberated by the allied troops that immediately aid would be organised and that the SS had to obey orders in this case from the British units . As previously agreed I stepped forward and out of the comfound surrounded by the fence and walked unto the armoured car . The car came to a standstill and out stepped a man in a British uniform who stretched out his hand and said my name is Derrick Sington . He said a lot more 15 however I did not understand it at that moment for I was very moved and could not bring out a word . After a few moments I had myself under control and told him with a few words that this was a concentration camp and that we all were very hungry . He invited me to come to the barrack of the camp conmmander and to tell everything . Moreover he asked my assistance in maintaining order . Of course I promised my assistance however all promises could not prevent that within half an hour after his arrival a real liberation celebration broke out during which the most incredible things happened . The Russian and Polish prisoners broke open the pigsty of the SS in which about 50 fat pigs were being kept . They were slaughtered right away . Within two hours after Sington had come and left fresh fried pork chops were offered . At his arrival Sington had driven with me through the camp and asked the prisoners to remain calm until vehicles were brought to the camp . He came back with a team and we had a long talk about what was to be done . The first sanitary unit arrived and a supply unit and a field kitchen which brew an extra fat soup for the starved prisoners . I had refused to eat any of the pork meat my endeavours however to convince the British who were prepared to do everything not to make a fat soup were fruitless . They just did not understand me we were hungry were we . I had said that myself . I patiently explained that my greatest wish was a little rice boiled in water from which one could eat a spoonful every half hour and this I wanted for the whole camp . 16 They listened politely to my stammering and looked at me with friendly eyes but went on frying very thick slices of corned beef and probably thought that I just was out of my mind asking for a bit of watery rice whereas they offered such delightful corned beef . The results of this liberation celebration were disastrous . On the day of the liberation and the night following on it four thousand up to five thousand persons died in the camp most of them because of eating too heavy food . It has taken us days to convince the British that a lean diet really was the best thing for the inmates of the camp . Finally they agreed but then the catastrophe already had happened . We found young Ukrainians dead with a pork chop in their hands . Others had not been able to walk more than twenty meters away from the kitchen where they ate their too savoury meal . They died in the main street of the camp . A special tragic circumstance of the now liberated camp was that in the first days the SS guards were still armed at the watch towers overlooking the camp and doing service . Service consisting of controlling the camp . The SS guards still obeyed an SS order stating that when there was rioting or irregularities they had to shoot into the camp . Now the British had supposed that the SS had laid down their arms and that the guards at least would not use their firearms . But in the first night of the liberation prisoners found their death because of the shooting by the Hungarian SS men . Though the next day we went to the British commander to request removal of the SS guards from the towers the Hungarian SS men were kept on duty . So the next night again the SS shot into the camp and when a third night there had been salvos the British commander finally consented 17 and agreed to our statement that this was a most unbearable situation and ordered the towers to be cleared . It was remarkable that the British who had not been aware of the existence of the concentration camp complex at the Luneburgheath/LOC when they occupied it considered and treated the SS guards as prisoners of war . The SS officers remained armed and although I had warned the British right from the start not to leave the camp population behind without leaving a British post as a control authority the British simply did not understand how dangerous their refusal made the situation . The only person among the Brtish with whom one could talk in a sensible way was Lt . Derrick Sington who showed because he understood German much more insigiht for the difficulties and worries of the inmates . In the three nights of this reign of terror by the Hungarian SS from April 15 till April 18 1945 41 prisoners were shot by the SS and died . The SS excused this shooting with the argument that hey had received order to use arms when there were riots and that they were under the impression that the British commander had ordered them to continue service as previously . It cost the deaths of 41 persons before the British were convinced that the SS troops . due to their mentality really could not be considered as and compared with regular troops . On the contrary the whole criminal mentality of the SS system showed itself very clearly during the last few days . Kramer the camp commander was formally arrested on the second day after liberation but when the armoured car entered the camp he had still mobilised a SS command and given orders to shoot if the prisoners would endeavour a break out of the camp . 18 After the British had taken command of the camp a penal unit of the German Wehrmacht had to bury at least corpses who had been lying in piles when the British entered the camp . After six days an American film team arrived to make a film of Belsen . I had a conversation with the cameramen who became very much shocked at what they saw . I was shocked and surprised about their ignorance of the situation under National Socialist reign . I told them that not in all their pictures they would be able to bring out the smell of the dead and this was during the last months of the existence of this camp the most characteristic thing . 
I and II of this reports describes the collection centre for Jews aged persons officials of the Jewish Community former frontline fighters in Berlin/GPE Grosse Hamburgerstrasse/STREET 26 where the author was detained until his deportation in July 1943 the staff of SS men Jewish doctors p.2 and administrative assistants called Ordner p.2 6 the second part being specially concerned with the horrible time from November 1942 to February 1943 under Hauptsturmführer Brunner his colleagues and their Jewish assistants all from Vienna/GPE p.3 7 . Daily transports to the goods stations Grunewald and Lquitowstrasse/STREET Beusselstrasse/STREET of p.4 before and later 100 p.6 . Lorries with 2 SS men 2 policemen an Ordner and a big dog would slowly drive through the streets all Jewish looking persons would be checked and dragged into the lorry by force despite their resistance or the occasional protest of the shocked passers by in Berlin/GPE W other eye witnesses behaved differently p.5 . Part III deals with the Aktion against mixed marriages on 27 February 1943 after which the Aryan partners demonstrated successfully against the arrests bribes p.7 . Part IV refers to the case of the large department store of Nathan Israel the 40 50 shop windows of which had been smeared with the word Jude Jew as the owner was British the fire brigade was ordered to clean up the mess but it was on the same day that the displays were plundered November 1938 . From July 1943 to May 1945 the author was being detained at Theresienstadt/GHETTO Auschwitz/CAMP Golleschau/CAMP Brünnitz/CAMP / CSR p.6 . 9 . Further References Heimenkauf Schleuse p.1 Theresienstadt/CAMP p.1 2 6 Reichsverein der Deutschen Juden p.2 . Gerichtsassessor Werner Simon p.2 4 . Hauptsturmführer Stock Detective Inspector Prüfer p.1 6 Scharführer Lachmuth De Bühl Sasse Wenzel Bolz Heimbach p.2 Dobberke p.2 3 6 Schneider p.2 7 . Suicide p.2 . Jewish doctors Salomon Fritz Sternberg p.2 . Bunker p.3 6 . Informers p.3 4 6 Hauptscharführer Weisl from Vienna/GPE p.3 Hauptscharführer Krell from Vienna/GPE Jewish informer Gerö from Vienna/GPE p.4 . Max Reschke former headmaster Jewish camp leader . Reichssicherheitshauptamt Obersturmbannführer Eichmann p.4 . Preiss Scheffler Degen jobmasters . Stargardter Meyer Koplowitz Zöllner Blond Goldstein may have collaborated with the Nazis more closely than necessary p.6 . 1 The Emigration at Grosse Hamburger Str . 26 in Berlin/GPE The former Berlin/GPE Jewish Community in Berlin/GPE ran an old people home at Grosse Hamburger Str . 26 ! The courtyard of this old people home adjoined the earliest Berlin/GPE Jewish cemetery ! It is the resting place of the famous Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn ! In April 1942 the Gestapo of the time made up the first Berlin/GPE old people transport to Theresienstadt/GHETTO from the home residents ! Once the first transport of inmates had vacated the building further transports were assembled initially from other Jewish old people homes and taken off to Theresienstadt/GHETTO ! This soon became standard practice with what were called one hundred transports leaving Berlin/GPE for the same destination every day ! The Gestapo Division IV D I Berlin/GPE C 2 Burgstr . 28/30 and those heading the Jewish affairs section SS Hauptsturmführer and Detective Inspector Prüfer now systematically turned the former old people home into an assembly camp for those scheduled for immediate deportation from Berlin/GPE ! The people deported from this building were over 63 and up to 70 or in some cases 90 ! Presumably with the aim of making the deportation rather more palatable to the people concerned they were handed wholly mendacious so called home purchase contracts for signature ! The guileless might reasonably infer from this that in spite of the signs of extermination plans there was after all perhaps still a glimmer of hope for survival ! Many people felt that their sense of what was right had not been disappointed because one surely could not give credence to the rumours of extermination that were circulating ! One had been born and brought up in Germany/GPE after all and so in many cases people simply could not believe that every last vestige of government protection for them had ceased to exist ! However most people did gradually begin to sense uneasily that everything – literally everything – that was going on in the building was purposeful done with exploitation and extermination in mind ! Every single possession was searched through even though the rooms people had lived in had been sealed up together with their contents whether movable or not ! On top of that a whole squad of Gestapo officials carried out further extraordinarily minute body searches using the most sophisticated methods ! Initially these physical examinations were conducted separately by male and female Gestapo personnel ! Later on and I shall return to this point practices of an entirely different order took place ! In the as they called it where everyone already searched was kept on the building second storey – they all remained segregated 2 pending deportation during the following night ! The transports would set off at 3.15 in the morning initially on foot as far as Monbijou/LOC Platz/LOC ! Here 2 special trams would be waiting with members of the Göring police battalion on board . The transport now proceeded to the Anhalter Station and at 5.58 every morning two coaches with the prisoners on board would be attached to the Dresden/CAMP train ! The route was Tetschen/LOC Bodenbach/LOC –/LOC Aussig/LOC –/LOC Rations available for the prisoners at that stage were still relatively speaking very good ! This was because prospective deportees took perishable foodstuffs along to the pre departure holding camp and used them for the general good ! Thus the people were relatively well fed as they travelled to their deaths ! The Reich Federation of Jews in Germany/GPE had appointed Gerichtsassessor Werner as Jewish camp leader ! It was then Simon responsibility imposed by the Stapo to provide several detachments of Jewish assistants known as Ordner – administrative assistants . Initially these people played a subordinate role ! They were expected to assist the people due for collection going to their homes to help pack linen clothing roll up blankets etc . ! ! Gestapo officials turned everything in the apartments upside down searching for valuables gold etc . A pre eminent figure in this work was a certain de Bühl Bühlei ! He made the Jewish helpers even lift out the ashes from the floors of the heating stoves searching for supposed valuables ! The actual collection of deportees was carried out by SS men from Burgstr . IV D I wearing civilian clothes ! They carried out their other duties there at the Burgstr . HQ in the department of Jewish affairs ! SS Scharführer sergeants Lachmuth Schneider de Bühl mentioned above Sasse Wenzel Bolz Heimbach Dobberke always went in pairs to fetch the old people out of their homes . In the emigration camp at Grosse Hamburger Str . 26 as it was now called three groups of Ordner had their so called Wachräume duty stations ! It was their task to shift the people possessions after searching from one place to another in the building then load them on horse drawn carts for the early morning departures and transportation to the Anhalter Station and on to the train ! Also stationed at Grosse Hamburger Strasse 26 were two doctors and two nurses to care for the deportees ! There were many suicides and attempted suicides ! The doctors tried every means available to keep the people alive as they had orders to deliver the stipulated number of people for transportation in the morning ! Nevertheless sometimes they would fail to prevent a suicide . In that case unsuspecting further individuals would be hauled from their beds in the middle of the night to make up the numbers ! ! Dr. med . Fritz Sternberg who has now died in the eastern sector of Berlin/GPE is thought to have gone far beyond what he as a doctor could rightfully do in his efforts to supply the Stapo with human material ! But the other doctor Dr. med . Salomon was reluctant to comply with the demands made of him and as a result became one of those despatched with me on 1 July 1943 to Theresienstadt/GHETTO ! Here I would also like to record that – irrespective of the norm of 63 as the minimum age for Theresienstadt/GHETTO – it was quite possible for Jewish Community office holders front line veterans from the First World War etc . to be taken off to Theresienstadt/GHETTO ! ! This allegedly conferred advantage but here in Berlin/GPE nobody knew that from there depending on circumstances 3 they might be taken straight on to Auschwitz/CAMP and the gas chambers . And that is why it was rare for an inmate of Theresienstadt/GHETTO to survive most of them were taken further east to the extermination camps ! ! At this time – before Brunner from Vienna/GPE – the Jewish camp leader had only administrative responsibilities ! He supervised the kitchen and its staff for instance – two cooks and the necessary underlings on kitchen duties . He also drew up the duty rosters for the Ordner . All the employees worked under Stapo pressure and the ever present threat that if something was not as it should be they would find themselves on a transport ! ! Back in the early days some of the basement space had been divided up into compartments used as punishment cells for any prisoners who offered resistance – beginning with a spell of solitary ! Some – if they became compliant – were then deployed by the Stapo to round up further deportees ! In this way they could postpone their own deportation remain in Berlin/GPE for the time being and attempt to save themselves and their dependents from deportation ! On such matters the Jewish camp leader of course could exert no influence at all but there were certain matters on which Dobberke would call him in to provide advice . Every now and again for instance there might be the chance of wangling a later deportation date ! This might even mean a life saved ! If there is talk today of Werner Simon having worked hand in glove with the Stapo I must refute this outright ! The prevailing ethos of the camp was such that even Simon could not entirely avoid picking up some of the tone ! Everything was conducted in a suitably military style if a Scharführer let alone a passed along the corridor there would always be a sharp command of Achtung Attention ! – this had been done since the beginning by order of the Stapo post ! The idea may well have been to prepare the old people for what was still to come ! I must here make it absolutely clear that all this amounted to no more than a very minor relatively trivial prelude to what came later for on 11 . 11 . 1942 Hauptsturmführer Brunner arrived from Vienna/GPE and ensured that all who entered this building would suffer a martyrdom of a very special order ! II . Emigration Camp Berlin/GPE N 24 Grosse Hamburger Str . 26 Report on the Brunner period ! On 11 November 1942 the Vienna/GPE Gestapo men suddenly appeared at the emigration camp bringing with them a staff of Viennese assistants ! Of these some were uniformed Waffen SS others wore civilian clothes ! The arrivals were Hauptsturmführer Brunner Hauptscharführer Weisl Hauptscharführer Krell and about six others whose names were not disclosed ! The retinue also included a number of gentlemen from the Vienna Jewish Community ! Only very gradually did it emerge that the last named individuals were not in fact Aryans . 4 A key figure among these people was a certain Gerö ! This man was important in that he was found later to have been instrumental working on commission from the Stapo and in extremely close collusion with the Vienna/GPE SS people in the hunt for Jews ! What happened first was a situation review conducted with the Prussian Stapo based at the Burgstrasse/STREET . I was in the building at the time and soon learned the decisions as they filtered through ! The entire building was now put on a major operations footing ! The first step was to clear out all remaining furnishings from the individual rooms of the former old people home leaving behind only the mattresses on the bare floors ! A large number of other rooms had no mattresses and these were furnished with a loosely thrown down layer of straw ! Next the kitchen services that had been provided hitherto were abruptly terminated ! For people being processed on to the transports from then on the only provision made was from food containers brought by cart from the Jewish People Kitchen Berlin/GPE C 2 at Gormanstrasse/STREET ! A second measure was removal of the doors from lavatories throughout the building use of lavatories whether by men or by women now had to be in public view ! When these measures began to be introduced the aforementioned Werner Simon still held the post of Jewish camp leader ! Brunner paraded all the building Jewish assistants soon to be known as Ordner in the now partly disused former kitchen ! Speaking with undisguised arrogance Brunner made it clear that the last Jews would soon leave Berlin/GPE ! Anyone guilty of the slightest shortcomings in the execution of assistants tasks would be on a transport forthwith ! Then came the question who among those present had seen frontline service in the first world war and had furthermore led a charge ? Max Reschke a retired headmaster and qualified teacher of commercial subjects was appointed on the spot as the second Jewish camp leader because he met the required criteria ! Perhaps the star by this time was already sinking – I mean it could be that this choice had some connection with Werner Simon – I just do not know ! But the thing was done besides Werner Simon who had been appointed to this post by the Reich Security Main Office Kurfürstenstrasse 126 Eichmann acting through the IVDI in Burgstrasse/STREET there was now a second Jewish camp leader ! I must add right away that a few days later still almost immediately after Brunner had assumed command Assessor Werner Simon was placed under house arrest and was kept in a room guarded by an SS sentry ! Meantime the mass deportations of Jews from Berlin/GPE were increasing in volume ! While previously the practice had been to take away Jewish workers from businesses factories etc . radically new methods now began to be employed ! The new procedures involved cleansing the city tenement by tenement by removing the Jews ! And now the SS men – directed by the gentlemen of the Jewish Community who had been brought from Vienna/GPE three in number plus Gerö began to work wholly systematically – as they presumably already had done in Vienna/GPE earlier ! And every day every 24 hours precisely one thousand Jewish people left Berlin/GPE on their way east ! Departures from the Grunewald goods station but mostly from the goods station 5 at Quitzowstr . Beusselstr . ! . When the tenement cleansing raids became less successful new arrangements were suddenly decreed as follows All the cartage firms engaged on the Jew programmes i.e. those that provided transport to the goods stations – the people involved were Preiss Scheffler and Degen – were ordered to bring their large lorries empty to the Hamburger Strasse ! Here each lorry was boarded by 2 SS men with an Alsatian dog 2 Stapo men and an Ordner ! The vehicles now cruised slowly along the Berlin/GPE streets ! East west north south ! ! When a Stapo man spotted someone who looked Jewish he jumped off with his dog and gave chase ! Then he would demand to see the person papers there on the street in case of any doubt i.e. if the papers were not one hundred per cent in order the persons detained would be manhandled on to the lorry ! On this day in particular there were enormous crowds of people on the Kurfürstendamm and Tauentzienstrasse/STREET and there were very vocal protests especially when the public realised just what was going on . The haul from these raids was extremely meagre and I still believe that the Viennese people here landed themselves with a major fiasco in Berlin/GPE ! On the same day the Vienna SS also carried out a search of a major photographic studio on the Kurfürstendamm the proprietor of which was allegedly Jewish and took away three full lorry loads of valuable antiques quality foodstuffs furniture etc . etc . to IV DI in Burgstrasse/STREET . Unloading these articles took the entire night . And everything presumably went to the Berlin Stapo for the time being ! Arrests were made in a wholly draconian way . Pregnant women might find walking or climbing up on the waiting lorries difficult old people likewise but it made no difference everything was done under the eyes of the German public and on the public streets sometimes there was even applause for the SS men ! However there were also other people who went silently round the next street corner so as not to have to see it all ! It was the rifle butts that enjoyed the greatest triumph near Spandauer Brücke when the wife of a Jewish dentist was to be collected she was shot dead getting out of the bath because in the SS men opinion she did not get out of it quickly enough ! The building progressively acquired the character of a prison ! The Jewish Ordner had to submit to a prescribed duty roster with three groups on guard for 8 hours each ! They were required to patrol the building all of whose windows were now barred to prevent escape attempts ! A police guard was installed but in practical terms this step was almost meaningless as the actual business of monitoring the Jews etc . was in the hands of the SS ! If occasionally a younger person attempted to escape from a departing transport the Ordner were responsible for sounding the alarm with the police guard ! Any further response measures following successful or unsuccessful escapes were implemented by the SS . The special importance 6 that this emigration camp had for the SS is best attested by the fact that until summer 1943 the camp had external lighting on the windows . By order these lights had to be kept on even during air raid alerts because of possible escape attempts ! The emigration camp had now converted the entire basement space for use as a punishment bunker ! Supervisory personnel there included a certain Koplowitz a Zöllner and others . These people in effect provided a full prison warden service ! The SS put in an appearance only if there was some special reason ! It will surely be obvious that these individuals were hated by the Jewish people imprisoned for purposes of extermination . It may well be that sometimes wrong things were done and sometimes justified incidents were recorded ! As for the Ordner proper it is important to distinguish clearly between those who carried out genuine assistant duties and those who to retain their lives and their freedom readily sold themselves to the SS as informers ! For all and any Ordner not prepared to serve in this way as informers the response was inexorable they would be on one of the next few transports ! ! In February 1943 the guest performance by the Vienna Gestapo came to an end and from that point on the same Berlin/GPE Stapo people as before – Dobberke Stock Prüfer – were once more in charge ! By that time however probably all that was still required was the work of tracing Jews who had gone underground and were living illegally ! Initially certain factory operations concerning Jews now released did Daily transports to Theresienstadt/GHETTO carrying 100 people at a time continued as before likewise transports to the east carrying many hundreds ! On 1 July 1943 I too was taken first to Theresienstadt/GHETTO from there to Auschwitz/CAMP Birkenau/CAMP then to the extermination camp at Golleschau/CAMP and on the death march through Germany/GPE to Brünnlitz/CAMP . On 8 May 1945 I was liberated there by Allied forces ! In summing up I want to make the following remarks about the activities of the Jewish camp leader and about the Ordner ! Those who ended up there as a consequence of the break up of the former Jewish Community had all been either officers or employees of that community . All of them during my observations conducted themselves as they should . They now carried out their further work in this form . Some forgot themselves and attempted regardless of their dignity to render the accursed regime greater service than was necessary ! Those known as such were first and foremost Stargardter Meyer Koplowitz Zöllner Blond Goldstein . The last named of these has already been sentenced to a substantial term of imprisonment in the Berlin/GPE jail Moabit/LOC ! The Jewish camp leader Reschke is known to me as an entirely conscientious individual whatever the nature of the allegations made against him after 1945 he served a sentence of 10 1-Feb years hard labour in Magdeburg/CAMP und Bautzen/CAMP imposed by the Soviet authorities – I can not confirm any of them ! I myself as mentioned above departed on a transport in 1943 and so obviously can not say what happened here in the camp in Berlin/GPE between then and 1945 ! Schulstrasse/STREET ? ? 10 7 III . The operation against mixed marriages at Rosenstrasse/STREET 2-Apr on 27 . 2 . 1943 Hitherto exempted from the collection operations mixed marriages were first attacked by the Nazis on this date ! The Jewish partners in the marriages were removed from their workplaces and assembled in the 2nd administrative block of the Jewish Community . It is a fact that in this case once all the men and women concerned were in the building the Aryan spouses made a weak attempt to demonstrate on the street outside ! It would of course have taken no more than a clear instruction from the police patrols to disperse the assembled people ! Yet this was surely the first time serious protests were made on a public street against the regime of the Nazis . In my view it was only in a vanishingly small number of cases that people involved in this protest were subsequently deported to extermination camps nearly all those arrested were quickly released to return to their families ! In charge in Berlin/GPE Sasse ! Commanding the Vienna/GPE Gestapo action programme ! Hauptscharführer Krell and from the Berlin/GPE Stapo Schneider . In several instances Jews who were released later stated that they had been allowed to go free by Schneider and Krell as a result of large bribes ! At least the Aryan wives and husbands had proved some mettle in that over a period of time the above mentioned demonstrations outside the building did take place . IV . The Kristallnacht as it was popularly known led among other things to the scrawling of the word JUDE on some 40 50 display windows at the large Berlin/GPE department store of N. Israel in the Königstrasse Berlin/GPE C 2 ! Israel/GPE a British national reported the matter to his consulate and a few hours later the Berlin/GPE fire brigade was made to completely clean all the defaced windows but later again still on the same day the goods displayed in these windows were ransacked ! ! 1 Emigration Camp – Although the report subject is patently a deportation camp the euphemism Abwanderung emigration has been retained . 2 Hauptsturmführer Approx . equivalent Captain 3 The term Schleuse denotes a lock used in transferring canal or coastal shipping between different water levels . In the present context the idea might be best conveyed in English by some such term as pen or holding room . In terms of function the nearest modern equivalent is a departure lounge . 4 Tetschen/CAMP Bodenbach/CAMP – Aussig Theresienstadt/GHETTO Tetschen/CAMP Bodenbach/CAMP Aussig/CAMP and Theresienstadt/GHETTO were the wartime German names for places in postwar Czechoslovakia/GPE . 5 Gerichtsassessor The title indicates a fairly recently qualified lawyer perhaps equivalent to a junior barrister . 6 Scharführer – Approx . equiv . Section leader . Hauptscharführer Chief platoon leader . 7 Obersturmbannführer Rank equivalent to a lieutenant colonel in the German army 8 Zunächst gingen ... weiter ! – The meaning of this sentence remains obscure to the translator . The translation has been kept as literal as possible except for von Juden which would normally mean of / by Jews . The text offers only thin circumstantial evidence a degree of syntactical incoherence for a conjectural substitution of released earlier for now released . 9 Brünnlitz/LOC CSR The acronym presumably refers to the town postwar location in the Czech Socialist Republic . 10 Schulstrasse/STREET ? ? – sic in the original typescript 
Steinharter was the wife of a well to do Munich/GPE lawyer . With the economic elimination of the Jews the Steinharter moved to Garmisch/CAMP Partenkirchen/CAMP and lived there unmolested until 1939 . On 9 November they were taken to the town hall and with a gun on the desk had to sign an undertaking that they were leaving voluntarily the same day . Under SS guard they packed and settled all the formalities and left for Munich/GPE . Their flat was sealed . While living in a Munich/GPE hotel Mrs Steinharter accompanied by her former landlady who was a member of the Party went secretly to the flat and packed some of her belongings . In endless negotiations for papers and visas the Steinharter tried to emigrate Switzerland/GPE refused a visa their quota number for USA/GPE was too high but finally in August 1939 they could go to England/GPE due to the generous help of an English Jew . They were given a house rent free and lived on their money in Switzerland/GPE . Mr Steinharter soon found office work and after 5 years they were naturalized . Mr Steinharter died in 1948 and Mrs Steinharter took up nursing . During this difficult period she received much kindness and help from English people . She now lives at the Otto Schiff House . In her restitution claim the former Gauleiter Hausböck proved a most helpful witness . Emigration Obstacles Ida Eva Steinharter née Hechinger . Born 12 October 1881 in Nuremberg/LOC . Religion Jewish . Married 1900 widowed in 1914 . Married her second husband Dr Steinharter a legal adviser and state prosecutor in Munich/GPE in 1919 . He died in London/GPE in 1948 . They had no children . Parents father was a merchant . Both parents came from Buchau/CAMP near Ulm/LOC in Württemberg/LOC . When she was married Mrs Steinharter lived in Munich/GPE where her husband took a very prestigious job . They lived comfortably . When her husband was stripped of his position at the beginning of the Hitler regime and was no longer allowed to perform any legal duties the Steinharters decided to move away from Munich/GPE . They moved to Garmisch/CAMP Partenkirchen/CAMP in 1934 as they thought the opportunity to do sports would be a distraction for a very depressed man . They initially lived in a furnished room . However they soon got the chance to rent a little house that was still being built . The owners of the house lived in northern Germany/CAMP Wilhelmshaven/CAMP and did not want to move into it just yet . These owners – Aryans – were extremely accommodating and drew up a very fair contract with the Steinharters . The Steinharters had their furniture shipped from Munich/GPE and felt at home in this beautiful modern apartment . However after almost five years 1939 a Jewish ban was issued in Garmisch/CAMP Partenkirchen/CAMP – the place was to be cleansed of the Jews immediately . But all their neighbours and the locals who knew them said Oh they do mean you by that . The people living in the town were not really aware of what was going on in the outside world . At 9 am on 9 November local men came to take them to the town hall . A revolver was kept on the desk throughout the hearing that followed . The officer on duty apparently told them that all Jews had to leave town by 6 pm . If you sign this to say that you will leave town 2 voluntarily with your money and personal possessions by 6 pm tonight then the Führer has stipulated that you may leave the country without your passport . Their passports had already been confiscated . You can hand in your luggage when you book your tickets to a destination outside of Germany/GPE . All Jews were supervised by an SS officer when packing their belongings and arranging their most important personal matters as well as when they were taken to the train station . Once vacated their homes were sealed by the SS officers . One of the Steinharters neighbours a Christian doctor issued a medical certificate to state that Mrs Steinharter was unwell . This enabled them to keep their car and use it to drive to the station . Mrs/STREET St./STREET was in fact healthy ! But Mr Steinharter seized the opportunity and played along with the whole eviction . And so they drove to the station handed in their baggage to be sent to Switzerland/GPE after purchasing a ticket to Zurich/GPE but then got in the car and drove to Munich/GPE . One of Mrs Steinharter brothers who had recently been living with them went with them on their dangerous journey home . It was dark and dense fog closed in so they drove very slowly and only arrived late in the night of 10 November . This was their saviour as they were not caught and they also escaped the arrests of all Jews that were made the day before . It was difficult to find accommodation but they ended up in the Regina Palast Hotel . They remained in their room while in the hotel and then drove to the Consulate General of Switzerland/GPE where they found out that everything the Nazis told them was a scam and you could not get into Switzerland/GPE without a passport . In actual fact all the Jews from Garmisch/CAMP Partenkirchen/CAMP who tried to cross the border were arrested upon arrival . Mrs Steinharter made one more clandestine trip back to Garmisch/CAMP Partenkirchen/CAMP . 3 Even her husband was unaware of her plans . She was accompanied by the owner of the house in which they lived in Garmisch/CAMP Partenkirchen/CAMP . She came along to help the Steinharters once she heard about the eviction of the Jews that had taken place . It is worth mentioning that this woman was a member of the Nazi Party and her son was in the Gestapo in Berlin/GPE . As the landlady of this house she could not be refused entry to the sealed building and Mrs Steinharter was allowed in with her . They both packed everything they could take with them and ended up leaving the building with 11 suitcases shipping everything as registered luggage to Munich/GPE . However the furniture large rugs and various valuables were left behind . The Steinharters were in contact with a cousin in Zurich/GPE who made every effort to ensure their lawful entry to Switzerland/GPE by issuing a guarantee for them . However there were long delays at the Consulate General of Switzerland/GPE in Munich/GPE and their emigration to Switzerland/GPE was ultimately rejected . In the meantime Mr Steinharter had received his exit permit due to his social status so they attempted to get to the U.S.A./GPE They received three visas but their waiting numbers within the quota were not due to be called for at least another 4 years . Shortly afterwards a new regulation came into force men over the age of 60 and their wives would be allowed a transit stay in England/GPE . But they needed either a guarantee or to be in possession of a certain amount of money otherwise the women would have to go as domestic staff . Although the Steinharters had money in Switzerland/GPE it was not enough for the period of time they were expecting to stay in England/GPE . Transferring the money from Switzerland/GPE would have been possible . One of their lawyer friends living in England/GPE – a Jew from Germany/GPE – wanted to help them and came up with an idea to get them what they wanted . He simply turned to a Jewish diamond merchant 4 who was known for being very wealthy but was not a personal acquaintance . He told him what had happened and asked for either money or a guarantee for his persecuted Jewish friends . Mr and Mrs Steinharter received the guarantee from him and were subsequently able to travel to England/GPE . However Mrs Steinharter brother was not able to emigrate with them as he was not yet 60 years old . He ultimately managed to illegally cross the border to Luxembourg/GPE . They arrived in England/GPE on 27 August 1939 . Getting out of Munich/GPE was very risky right up to the last minute the British Consulate General in Munich/GPE was about to close as relations had broken down as a result of the impending war . They must have been so happy when they received the permit for England/GPE in time . It needed to be entered on their Jewish identity card otherwise it would not have been valid . No flights were departing at this time but they managed to book themselves on to the last ship for England/GPE . So they travelled via Frankfurt/GPE to the Hook of Holland and crossed the sea on their rescue journey . The overcrowded train was the unpleasant end to the gruelling frightening and hounded chapter of their lives in Germany/GPE . There were civil servants from the Consulate travelling with them to England/GPE on the ship . Mrs Steinharter said it was like being on an emigration ship . The Steinharters settled in London/GPE where they were initially able to live on the money that they wired from Switzerland/GPE . They took a room in a boarding house but they were soon able to upgrade their apartment through their ties with an English Jew a childhood friend of Mr Steinharter . This lady husband was the Chairman of 5 Bloomsbury House and the owner of an unoccupied house in London/GPE . They gave the Steinharters this house fully furnished and rent free . They were finally at peace after the multitude of experiences and the turmoil of the past few years that culminated in their emigration . Mr Steinharter soon found work in a factory office where he was treated very kindly by the English boss who was a Christian and his work colleagues . He died in 1948 . The owner of the house that the Steinharters had been living in had also died and it was now being used for other purposes . It would have been too large for Mrs Steinharter as a widow anyway . So she moved out initially living with a neighbour . Immediately after her husband death Mrs Steinharter received great support and kindness from her neighbours and she could not be more thankful even today . All of the people who were so keen to help her were English . Shortly after this she moved away to a boarding house in Belsize/LOC Park/LOC where she lived for seven years . Five years of that until she fell ill she worked as a private nurse . Despite having never worked in that kind of role before she made the most of her new life . She was called on by various doctors so she always had plenty to do . Mrs Steinharter now lives in Otto Schiff House London/GPE . The Steinharters had quickly decided against emigrating to the USA/GPE given their satisfactory circumstances in London/GPE and their receipt of a residence permit . Five years in they became British citizens . 6 The following may be of interest When Mrs Steinharter claimed compensation as part of the reparations process for the possessions left behind in the house in Garmisch/CAMP Partenkirchen/CAMP her representative a lawyer in Munich/GPE contacted several witnesses . Former Nazi party regional leader Hausböck was summoned as a key witness . He confirmed all of Mrs Steinharters claims but then stated that all Jewish possessions had been publicly auctioned . Until the auction the sealed houses were guarded by SS officers to prevent looting . Based on this statement which did not need to be reviewed further Mrs Steinharter received confirmation of her compensation claim . 
Durlacher Cohen a Dutch Jewess by birth married a German Jew in Baden/CAMP . When the Nazis came to power they emigrated to Holland/GPE where Mrs Durlacher Cohen tried to assist as many people as possible . She always acted on intuition asking for the co operation of people whom she had not met before and was never mistaken in her judgment . In this way she secured the help of Mr Stroes secretary at the municipality of Oosterbeck/LOC who provided her with forged papers in order to ‘ legalize 6 Jewish children . Forged papers were also procured for the Durlacher family but they proved to be insufficient . In a very complicated way the couple was able to get into possession of the birth certificates in photostatic of a Dutch couple Mr and Mrs Zeller who had emigrated to the USA/GPE . years ago . As Mr and Mrs Zeller they asked permission to settle down in Holland/GPE again pretending that their passports were lost during a raid in France/GPE . The permit was granted and they rented a house in Heelsum/LOC near Arnheim/GPE in autumn 1943 their two sons lived ‘ underground with them . Mrs Durlacher Cohen describes the many ways in which the Dutch people private persons as well as officials assisted the Jews . Our Illegal Life in Holland Mrs Henriette Durlacher Cohen was born in Holland/GPE illegible and married a German Jew with whom she lived in Baden/CAMP Baden/CAMP Germany/GPE . When the National Socialist laws made life too hard in Germany/GPE they emigrated to Holland/GPE and tried to help as many people as they could throughout the war years . Mrs Durlacher took a 14 year old cousin to a hiding spot for example as the girl was living all by herself . Her parents had been deported . As long as the child – like any other child in hiding – did not have a personal identity card she was forced to live in hiding without being able to access normal education or participate in any of the activities children normally do . Personal identity cards were only issued once young people reached the age of 15 . Mrs Durlacher therefore went to the local council secretariat of the town of Oosterbeek/LOC using a FALSE name and presenting herself as being non Jewish . She approached the office manager a Mr Stroes whom she asked to show her how to obtain a FALSE personal identity card without having to steal one . He gave sympathetic advice . Mrs Durlacher had not known that official . There were no rules which she could have used for guidance { illegible } as to which officials could be trusted and which not . That was something she therefore always decided based on her gut feeling . Thinking back she believes that sometimes the way people expressed themselves played a role and that sometimes 2 she could see that they would be able to trust each other just by looking into people eyes . Mr Stroes informed her that a written application needed to be made to obtain an ID card and that the personal details of both the child and the parents needed to be enclosed with the application . Then an ID card would simply be issued . As the cousin lived in hiding and was Jewish neither her own papers nor those of her parents could be used and therefore personal details needed to be found . Mr Stroes stole a blank marriage certificate from the civil registry which they completed with two random names as the married couple . They retained the child first name but used the married name of the fictitious couple as the surname and predated the child date of birth by one year so that she would be entitled to have an ID card . They falsified the document without any difficulty and following this success Mrs Durlacher legalised five other children in collaboration with Mr Stroes . This not only ensured that the children were able to lead normal lives but they could also legally obtain food cards and other ration coupons for people living in hiding these papers could often only be obtained by stealing them and the risk of being found was reduced to a minimum for both the children and the people posing as their parents . The rescue of these six children was a total success . Many of those living in hiding tried to get rid of their own ID cards which were marked with a J and to get normal ID cards instead . To achieve this Christian Dutch officials proceeded as follows to steal papers from the various authorities issuing these cards . They took a few blank cards every day or every week which were then completed with FALSE names and stamps by the organisation of Illegals } . The officials who stole the papers took a great risk 3 as did the people who completed them with names and stamps but the risk was greatest for those who used them . In Holland/GPE people needed to be registered not only with the residents registration office at their place of residence but also with the central people registry Bevolkingsbüro in The/GPE Hague/GPE . In very few cases it was possible to have stolen original cards registered with the central registry in The/GPE Hague/GPE . It was possible to carry out only so few of these manipulations because the office was under German supervision . If an ID card was not registered in The/GPE Hague/GPE there was a risk of being found out in case of a thorough check . The checks were generally not that thorough on trains and in the streets as long as people did not look Jewish . But when searches were conducted in people homes officers checked very carefully and it was likely that people would be found out . From 1942 onwards it was often the case that entire streets were blocked off and then all homes in these streets were searched . Around 1943 the Durlacher family lived with such falsified but inadequate papers under the name of Dubois in the town of Benekom/LOC near Arnheim/CAMP . They urgently needed good papers because their son had escaped from the Westerbork/CAMP camp . They thought that they might be able to repatriate { illegible } coming back to Holland/GPE from abroad . However putting this idea into practice required enormous preparatory work and it took 5 months just to obtain the tickets for Mr and Mrs Durlacher . Mrs Durlacher again approached Mr Stroes who still thought of her 4 as being non Jewish . She asked him how she could obtain approval for a Dutch family wanting to migrate back to Holland/GPE from southern France/GPE in order to settle in Holland/GPE . She chose southern France/GPE because it was beyond the demarcation line and not occupied and the Germans were therefore unable to make any enquiries there . Mr Stroes told her that these people should simply come they would only need to show their passports to be approved for settlement in Holland/GPE by the central registry in The/GPE Hague/GPE . Knowing these facts she went home and the family – the sons were 17 and 19 years old – worked out the following plan as they would be unable to immigrate again under the name of Durlacher . They tracked down a family where both the husband and wife had been born in Holland/GPE but had emigrated to America/GPE long before the war . These people had last visited Holland/GPE in about 1935 when they lived in Wageningen/CAMP near Arnheim/CAMP . The plan hatched out by the family was carried out by Mrs D. alone because she was the one looking least Jewish . Mrs Durlacher called the residents registration office in Wageningen/CAMP and asked for all of the personal details of the Zeller family from the USA/GPE who had stayed in Wageningen/CAMP for a three month visit in 1935 . Everybody was free to ask for this kind of information . She agreed that she would call again the following day and she was provided with the requested information in all available detail . Mr Zeller had been born in Enkhuizen/LOC in northern Holland/GPE and Mrs Zeller in Rotterdam/LOC . Mrs Durlacher then wrote to the civil registries in Enkhuizen/LOC and Rotterdam/LOC asking for copies of the birth certificates purportedly on behalf of the Zeller family in the USA/GPE . After 5 days she had photocopies of the birth certificates . Armed with these papers 5 she then went to Zeist near Utrecht/LOC presenting herself as Mrs Zeller asking for permission to resettle in Holland/GPE . When she was asked to submit her passport and that of her husband she explained that these had been lost during a bomb raid on Strasbourg/CAMP and that she had been unable to rescue anything but their birth certificates of which she showed the photocopies . Her story was believed and she was given the necessary forms which she completed and which the local council in Zeist/LOC then forwarded to the central registry in The/GPE Hague/GPE . 48 hours later the local council in Zeist/LOC was given approval for the Zeller family to settle in the town . They were able to pick up their papers on the following day and Mr Durlacher now had legal papers in the name of Zeller and Mrs Durlacher had papers in the name of Zeller Selbach . They stated that they were living in a guest house in Zeist/LOC but gave a FALSE address . Now they were able to obtain food cards and other ration coupons from the competent authorities . Nobody thought or suspected that the papers were falsified as they only used original papers . After a few weeks they found a furnished house in Hoelsum/LOC also near Arnheim/GPE which they rented officially and then moved in on l October 1943 . They were able to have their two sons with them but only in secret . The sons needed to be legalised differently as they would have otherwise have been recruited for labour service or defence services by the Germans . This is why they did not want to become fully official and legal . 6 Their son Leofried was the one who had managed to escape from Westerbork/CAMP . All German authorities had been informed of the incident and he would have been executed on the spot had he been found . Leofried was studying textile chemistry at the time . All students were at a risk of being abducted to Germany/GPE and to prevent that from happening the Durlacher family thought that Leofried should write to various factories and dye works in southern Germany/GPE that they were aware of under the alias of Leonardo Maduro from Curacao West/GPE Indies/GPE . He asked the companies whether they were looking for a good worker and he received responses from almost all of them . Some asked him for further details and information as they would like to hire him while others wrote back saying they were interested and would be in touch soon . These letters were very important as during raids it was important to be able to show that one was looking for work in Germany/GPE . Also one needed to be very persuasive with the SS to convince them that it would be better for the German economy to keep businesses running rather than have young men sent off to do forestry or similar labour . Of course he never had any intention of taking a position in Germany/GPE it was enough to be able to show that he wished to work in Germany/GPE . Mrs Durlacher can not remember what they did to save their other son Evan . She believes that they used a similar approach with Dutch companies . 7 In about summer 1944 all 1000 guilder notes were cancelled and people could exchange them for different bank notes of the same value . But there was a set date which Mrs D. can not remember after which the exchange rate for 1000 guilder notes varied between 400 and 600 guilders and an official exchange was no longer possible . People forced to live in secrecy and hiding had little opportunity to exchange their money in time and they suffered huge losses . Mrs Durlacher had become friends with an older lady who was a member of the council of Gelderland/LOC province she can not recall her name . This lady introduced Mrs D. to some Christians who were sufficiently wealthy and prepared to exchange 1000 guilders for l000 guilder notes even after the deadline had expired . With these transactions people living in hiding probably entered a moral obligation to pay back the money if they survived the war . However it was assumed even then that they would themselves get the money back from the Dutch government provided they were able to demonstrate that it had been impossible to exchange the notes in time . Through her contacts Mrs Durlacher managed to help a number of people living in hiding in this way . To do this she had to travel by train to Rotterdam/LOC  Amsterdam/GPE Arnheim/GPE and other destinations sometimes several times a week sometimes every day . Jews were not allowed to use any means of transport . During these trips she was often asked to show her papers but never had any difficulties . Mrs Durlacher said that 60 % of the officials at the 8 public authorities in Oosterbeek/LOC Renkum/LOC and Ede/LOC near Arnheim/GPE were good and provided assistance as did the officials in Zeist/LOC near Utrecht/LOC . They stole falsified and helped in other ways . 
report on the difficulties the author had to overcome . passengers on the St. Louis steamer who had received the permit of immigration to Cuba/GPE were not allowed to land when they arrived at Havana/GPE . The American Joint offered to pay 1-Feb million $ for them which was refused their representative in Paris/GPE succeeded to get the offer accepted in four equal quarters through Belgium/GPE England/GPE France/GPE and Holland/GPE . 9 . References Herbert Lehmann New/LOC York/LOC p.1 . Kitchener/CAMP Camp/CAMP p.2 . Hicem Paris/GPE p.2 . Hapag p.2 4 . Captain Schroeder p.3 4 . Frustrated Emigration to Cuba/GPE Throughout all of 1937 we were preoccupied with the question of our emigration and when the horrible wave of arrests of Jews began at the end of 1938 this problem became even more urgent for us even though we were spared this wave because of our particular circumstances . Thus the years 1937 and 1938 were a time of great difficulties for us of agitation and sometimes of despair until we finally saw a silver lining on the horizon . We finally remembered that we had first cousins in New/GPE York/GPE with whom we had corresponded until the outbreak of World War 1 . But as often happens in such cases the correspondence was revived the old letters had gotten lost and the contact was completely broken off . How could one find the address after a space of time of more than 20 years . I contacted every possible Jewish organization in New/LOC York/LOC . It took about 9 months until it was determined that It was all in vain ! By chance but with a good feeling I turned for advice to the American Jewish statesman Herbert Lehmann who was governor of the/LOC State/LOC of/LOC New/LOC York/LOC at the time and described our situation to him . I received a very kind response immediately . He told me that he had asked the New/LOC York/LOC Chief of Police to do everything he could to find our relatives . Caught in the continental view that it must be a minor matter for a Chief of Police to find residents in his city and unaware of the fact that over there there is no requirement to register with the local police there was great joy in our halls in response to this letter from Herbert Lehmann . But this feeling of being on top of the world was soon followed by the depths of despair when the Chief of Police informed us much later that his attempts had been in vain and would remain so unless I was in a position to specify the last address I knew of my relatives . But this was possible for us . In our despair I wrote again to Herbert Lehmann who answered me immediately that he had assigned the investigation to a special office . And lo and behold ! Less than 14 days later I received word from this 2 office of their success . On the basis of the documents provided the oldest member of the American family had come forward and acknowledged their relationship . A few weeks later our son received an affidavit for the U.S.A./GPE on the basis of which he was then later accepted into the Kitchener Camp in England/GPE since in the meantime the German quota for immigrating to the U.S.A./GPE had been closed . Precisely on New Year Day 1938 the liberating telegram arrived for my wife and me informing us that our relatives had made available to us a large amount of dollars at the HICEM in Paris/GPE the representative of the Jewish Aid Society in Berlin/GPE which after consultation with the Aid Society we were supposed to use for emigration . At this time the opportunity arose to get a permit for Cuba/GPE for a sum of money of several hundred dollars . We took advantage of this opportunity and received from the agent who handled these matters the news that our permit was approved and that we should take care of the immediate transfer of the sum of money from Paris/GPE . We immediately did what was necessary at the Aid Society and waited with excitement for the permit until one day to our great horror we received a telegram from Cuba/GPE that the money transfer had not arrived and that our acceptance by Cuba/GPE could only be valid for another 48 hours . The transfer from Paris/GPE had apparently been forgotten whether it was due to the fault of HICEM or the Jewish Aid Society remains an open question . Through an exchange of telegrams and a telephone call with Paris/GPE I finally still managed to get the transfer to Cuba/GPE done in time and we promptly received the permit . Booking the berths also did proceed without difficulties . Hapag Hamburg America/GPE Line had commissioned a special ship the largest diesel motor ship the St. Louis for 1000 passengers who all had the same permit to Cuba/GPE . When I arrived at the Berlin/GPE office of Hapag in order to reserve two berths the official told me that everything was sold out . Thereupon I asked him if it might not be possible to get berths if I paid the fee in American currency which I had available in Paris/GPE . The official promised me that he would immediately contact the headquarters in Hamburg and would let me know the next day . 3 But I learned the same day that the Aid Society had reserved berths on this ship which could not all be fully used by it and the Aid Society gave me permission to demand two of these reserved berths for myself . When I arrived again at the Hapag office on the next day and the official beaming said that I could get two more berths in exchange for payment in currency I explained to him that I could no longer honor my offer on this matter because he had given me FALSE information and I demanded two of the berths that had been reserved by the Aid Society to which the official had to express his agreement under these circumstances whether he liked it or not . So we left from Hamburg/GPE on May 13 1939 on the St. Louis to Cuba/GPE though we could only take with us two suitcases with things for four weeks because the currency exchange supposedly had been able to complete their examination of our baggage lists in time . A shipping agent we had contracted was supposed to forward all of our luggage to Cuba/GPE after examining our lists of the contents . After a wonderful trip in very beautiful weather across the Atlantic/LOC we arrived in Havana/GPE in good spirits . When all the passengers had already made preparations to disembark the catastrophic message came that the President of Havana/GPE had forbidden our landing at the last moment and Cuban police came on board to watch over us . We were never told the reasons for this prohibition . The American Joint American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee immediately took on the matter prominent public figures flew over from New/LOC York/LOC but all attempts were in vain and even Joint offer to pay half a million dollars for permission for this case was rejected . Thus the St Louis had to leave Havana/GPE for Hamburg/GPE with all the Jewish emigrants after the captain received from Hamburg/GPE per telegram the instructions Head back to Hamburg/GPE . The mood on board was one of desperation . Through Joint mediation world opinion now stepped into action and when this became known the initial shock subsided . News arrived daily about the efforts to save us and depending on how the news sounded the mood on board would naturally change . The optimist saw one night between two days the pessimist saw one day between two nights . By and large however the mood remained calm and composed and there was any panic in large part due to the conduct of Captain Schröder a TRUE 4 human being whom all the passengers could thank enough . Finally Mr. Tropper the representative of the American Joint in Paris/GPE succeeded in getting Belgium/GPE England/GPE France/GPE and Holland/GPE to each take in one quarter of the passengers in exchange for the amount of money that the Cuban President had offered . We ended up on the English list and landed in June 1939 in Southampton/LOC we were saved . There was another epilogue for us . Because it had become known throughout all of Germany/GPE through the press and radio that we had been forbidden to land all of the shipping agents who were supposed to forward our luggage had failed to forward it and were waiting for further news from their clients . Only our shipping agent did wait he forwarded all of our luggage to Cuba/GPE although he as we later determined knew full well about the ban against landing . So we arrived here in light summer clothes in part even wearing tropical clothes without any stuff for winter . Because we were successful at getting our luggage returned to London/GPE within two months of our arrival in London/GPE and the war broke out in the meantime we had to fight for more than a year until we got our luggage back and this happened only after our relatives in New/LOC York/LOC agreed to pay 165 dollars for storage fees in Cuba/GPE . The amount of approximately 400 dollars that had been transferred from Paris/GPE to Cuba/GPE for the permit remained lost . 
report by a Jewish woman who lived in Berlin/GPE with her paralysed husband until his death in September 1942 . She describes the deportation of her Jewish friends and her relatives . Her family was deported from Breslau/CAMP her sister in November 1941 and her parents some months later to the camp Riebnig near Brieg/CAMP . Mrs Veit records numerous cases of kindness shown to her and help given to her and other Jews at considerable risk by non Jewish friends and even strangers . They visited them gave them food and ration cards provided illegal billets and warned them of impending arrests . Among those she mentioned as particularly helpful are Heinz Hilpert director of the Deutsche Theater Karchow the actor and film director Fritz Clemens a businessman and his employee Kleinjung who was jailed for having given ration cards to Jews the literary historian Paul Wiegler the editor of the Berliner Illustrierte Dr. Wuesten Gotthard Schuh of the Meue Zuercher Zeitung Harold Lechenperg also of the Illustrierte the cartoonist Theo Matejko ? then with the periodical Die Wehrmacht . 9 . Remarks See related report P.III.d . No.536 also written by Mrs Susanne Veit . Non Jews Helping Jews Our emigration failed because my late first husband Wilhelm Meyer suffered a stroke because of the anxiety with complete paralysation of the left hand side . We had to stay in Berlin/GPE only our son came to England/GPE before the start of the war aged 13 years old . My husband died in autumn 1942 and I went into hiding in order to live illegally until the end of the war . Most depressing was not this illegal living but rather the time beforehand in which the Nazi government measures became more and more grotesque and wicked . One after the other our relatives and acquaintances disappeared one way or another and I was unable to keep any of this hidden from my husband . Rather being completely fit mentally until his death he was needed by Jewish friends as an advisor by the Aryans as a confidant for their outbursts of disapproval and desperation and witnessed it all from his bed possibly even more intensively . We received an evacuation summons twice and both times we were delayed after a medical examination because he was unfit for travel . But from his bed he said goodbye first to many who robbed of everything completely legally could still travel out to America/GPE after the start of the war and then those who had to go on the transport . I helped one elderly lady whose children were in France/GPE Mrs Danziger with her packing . I then heard that she was struck by a blow at a Berlin/GPE railway station during the loading for Poland/GPE . My husband had to hear everything from one collection as an elderly woman two doors away from us in a home with five tenants in which we had been temporarily housed was taken away by police early at 5 o clock . One of our acquaintances a bachelor Rudolf Kahn was recognised without his star from someone in a cinema and denounced – this diversion was allowed as settlement for his forced labour from time to time – he immediately hung himself in the police cell even before the Gestapo arrived . One acquaintance Bruno Goldberg his brother is in the USA/GPE and previously was an editor at Felix Bloch Erben said goodbye to us . He was in forced labour and learned in autumn 1942 that he was threatened with collection . He no longer went to his work and wanted to cross the/LOC Grüne/LOC Grenze/LOC into Switzerland/GPE . His reception by Swiss friends and also the route there where possible was prepared with the help of a good Aryan friend in Berlin/GPE . But he seems to never have reached his destination . Miss Berend a sister of the Jean Paul researcher Dr. Eduard Berend who at the time had gone to Genf/LOC was collected here and already at the collecting point on Levetzowstrasse/STREET . Her employer – the boss of a small private enterprise who had received her as an allocated forced labourer – was still able to reclaim her from here and 2 get her out again . The only time I heard of someone being able to get back out of there . But unfortunately a few months later she was collected for good . I personally was released from forced labour due to my husband need for care however my school friend Alice Schnell who worked in the Jewish department at Siemens visited us every week and from her we learned how there and in the Jewish community everything was heading step by step towards complete liquidation and extermination . She still had a long time I think until the introduction of the Jewish star she worked illegally as a secretary for authors and screenwriters . These were put into contact with her partly by the long time secretary of the German Theatre where under Hilpert as director there was a particularly good and civil atmosphere . E.g. I remember that she – I believe still around 1940 – wrote a manuscript for the actor and director Karchow in her home in Westend/LOC . The forced labourers thought they were protected through their work . But she got a warning on the back of which she – I think on the 26th February 1943 – did not go to work and in fact on that day the workers were collected directly from the department at Siemens . She went into hiding and after a time of vagabondage a friend of ours a particularly good civil person who also supported me during my illegal time Fritz Clemens provided her with a hiding place at the residence of one of his customers . And that was in fact a Spanish diplomat who had brought his German wife and children to Spain/GPE and was very glad that his home in Halensee/LOC did not remain empty . He visited his family in Spain/GPE and there tried to obtain FALSE papers so that she could go to his wife . In doing so without realising he got mixed up with Gestapo agents and so to his horror he himself was the cause of her arrest from his home . Mr Clemens has a shop on Olivaer Platz and his vendor at the time Mr Kleinjung for his part created aid initiatives for Jews of his own accord . A school friend of mine Hilde Bielschowski went into hiding in the summer of 42 together with her brother and mother very difficult for three people together at the start and Mr Kleinjung made ration cards for them . The three Bielschowskis got snatched as we matter of factly and unpleasantly called it back then and during interrogation they were blackmailed into giving the name of the supplier of the ration cards . Mr Kl . was arrested and put into jail so survived the war which otherwise in Russia/GPE would have been very doubtful . The conduct of our Aryan friends was for us the positive aspect of that time with only two exceptions which I want to forget today they are both head editors incidentally . Colleagues who were not so close 3 also expressed their sympathy . The literary historian Paul Wiegler with whom we had never kept company wrote to us in 1938 asking us to visit him . Dr. Wüsten head of the Berliner Illustrierten until the war end but I believe not a PG told us about his family and then apologised in a manner of speaking for the fact that he is the only one of his siblings who is not in jail has not emigrated or is not politically disreputable in some other way . The Zurich/LOC photographer Gotthard Schuh – today editor of the Neuen Züricher Zeitung – visited us after the start of the war . When he went to Ullsteinhaus an editor there asked him You are living with these Meyers or going there are you ? You ca keep an honest relationship with Jews they just as much enemies of the state as Poles . Schuh angrily told this to the head editor of the Illustrierten at the time Harald Lechenpegg who having never visited us before asked to also be brought to us as a demonstration and he sat for two hours at my husband bedside . The very well known newspaper cartoonist Theo Matejko who had been employed at the publishers Die Wehrmacht a conservative but not very Hitler friendly publishers since 1938 also regularly visited us during the war brought us many expensive and for us unobtainable groceries and told us a lot of confidential news from the army from the base and the front and also from the Reich Chancellery . Before I went into hiding I visited him and his wife in order to say goodbye . There I learned the following An animal painter he had previously known had lost his work permit because he was non Aryan . First of all Matejko had tried to sell his pictures for him . Then because he no longer felt safe from persecution he let him use his studio so that he could work there in peace . Finally because he no longer felt safe in his own home he provided him with a room in his house . But finally it was no longer possible for the man to hide and avoid collection and he procured himself veronal . When I arrived at the house he had been on his deathbed for a day in other words unconscious . Because he was an especially strong healthy person he did not die quickly and everybody was now fearing that perhaps the Gestapo could come before he was released . Because being called back to life and then evacuated was what you were especially scared of . My husband also had to hear by letter about the evacuation of my relatives in Breslau/GPE in great detail . People in Breslau/GPE – unlike in the initially rigorously bureaucratic system in Berlin/GPE – were mainly evacuated as soon as a Nazi needed their apartment or house . These transports then initially went to three 4 camps in Schlesien/CAMP itself I also remember Grüssau/CAMP and Riebnig near Brieg/CAMP where Jews could even have a camp organisation and where we could send letters and packages . As was soon exposed they were only meant as transition camps for the full evacuation . My sister who lived with my parents was very suddenly collected without prior notice . My parents were not allowed to bring her food and warm clothes at the collection point . She probably went to the Baltic/LOC we have not heard anything more from her . That was in November 1941 and the elderly people now lived without her for five or six more months in their home . They were given a few days notice of the evacuation of their home . This took place in the usual thuggish way . They had to take good clothes back off which those collecting them immediately packed for themselves and they instead had to put on old things etc . etc . Good friends of my sister Dr. Laubhardt a teacher at the Victoriaschule and his wife who I am still friends with today were with them until the end . My parents went to the Riebnig camp . My father died there from pneumonia after two months . My sister friends had the courage to write long and wonderful letters of condolence to my mother there . The coffin was driven out of the camp on a horse wagon and is supposed to have been buried at the Jewish cemetery in Brieg/CAMP . My mother was not allowed out of the camp . You soon began to tell from the letters coming from these camps that once again packing rearranging and gloomy leave taking was beginning . I do not know how long this camp continued to exist . After a few months my mother was taken away I hope to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . That was the last news we got from her . After hearing these pieces of news my husband who up until now had very bravely battled his heavy grievances aware that it meant protection for me lost the will to live . In September 1942 he died and my illegal time began . My experiences after I went into hiding were more serious and were mostly more dramatic than how it sounds in the following accounts and the danger which all those who helped me placed themselves into was very great . That my current husband came through it so unhurt is still a wonder today . Aside from my life I myself certainly did not have much to risk . When I went into hiding my son had been rescued in England/GPE my husband was dead and my relatives were already collected and missing . My only concern 5 was to always handle myself in such a way that I put those who were helping me in as little danger as possible . For me the time before going into hiding was the truly grim part when we lived in the ghetto so to speak in Berlin/GPE and learned of the full extent of the evil and corruption portrayed through the reports from various circles of acquaintances and the dramas which took place as the Berlin/GPE Jews were taken away both very completely as most Germans did not learn until after the war . There were our friends who partly belonged to the opposition or passive resistance . We Jews were the only ones who they could pour their hearts out to without fear . There were also the Jewish friends who witnessed the operations in the Jewish community and in the places of forced labour and then those who we witnessed saying their goodbyes before evacuation . I myself am one of those children of fortune who came through and who came through very leniently at that . There were definitely people who – mostly because they had lots of money – came through implausibly pleasantly and safely but on the other hand some had to pass from hiding place to hiding place and deception to deception with far more difficulty and uncertainty than me . 

winter of 1940 the author a Polish Christian fled with her husband from the Russians to Wilno/GHETTO . Mr Zadarnowska who had been a forester on an estate near Lida/GHETTO East Poland/GPE became a labourer while the author worked as stage designer at a theatre . Here she met a Jewish prompter Masza Perewoska . After the German occupation of Wilno/GHETTO the Zadarnowska decided to return to their home and Mrs Zadarnowska went to say farewell to the Perewoskas . She found the whole family in a state of upheaval as the Germans had ordered all Jews to move into the ghetto . Nobody at the time knew of the subsequent mass murders in Ponary/LOC forest but on her return home the author felt compelled to save Masza and her daughter Lilka . In November 1941 she returned to Wilno/GHETTO . Ill though she was she faced the inclement weather and considerable danger to establish contact with Masza . Finally she found a workman willing to take a message into the Ghetto and the women met at the house of a mutual friend . Meanwhile the author sold Masza valuables in order to finance the purchase of forged papers a certificate of baptism and travel permits . At one of the selections Masza and her family had been included for the transport to Ponary/LOC and in a desperate effort to save her friend the author prevailed upon Professor Kola Taranowski to give her shelter so that she and her child did not have to return to the Ghetto . The next day Masza escaped to Lida/GHETTO . Encouraged by this success the author applied for her own travel paper and at the psychological moment asked for the inclusion of a child and followed Masza to Lida/GHETTO . After days of frantic search and with the help of a parson she located Masza and in spite of the great dangers involved travelled with her and the child to her home . Her husband soon agreed to keep mother and child . Dangerous nerve racking months followed during which the author tried to ward off the constant danger of detection by making Masza look more Aryan and by teaching the child the Polish language and Christian prayers . In the following summer frequent Russian partisans ambushes added to their anguish and finally forced the Zadarnowska to move to Lida/GHETTO . They took Masza and Lilka with them but a few weeks later somebody asked for Masza on the telephone by her proper name . Undeterred by the danger and the proximity of Gestapo headquarters the author helped Masza and the child to flee to a farm the commandant of the Polish Resistance having provided forged papers . A period of constant moves followed and in the end the author had to take them back as nobody else was brave enough to shelter them . Later Masza decided to volunteer for work in Germany/GPE Konstanz/LOC . The Zadarnowska were forced by the constant Russian air attacks to move to Warsaw/GPE where the couple got separated during the insurrection . Mrs Zadarnowska was taken to Breslau/CAMP as a slave labourer Mr Zadarnowska was sent to Dachau/CAMP where he perished . Mrs Zadarnowska managed to flee to Konstanz/CAMP and join Masza . Both had to work hard and when at the end of the war Switzerland/GPE opened her frontiers they went there . Mrs Zadarnowska now works as a designer at the Polish museum in Rapperswi/LOC the Jewish family she saved live in Israel/GPE . Rescue of a Jewish family by a Polish Non Jewess I met Masza Perewoska in Wilno/GHETTO back in the winter of 1940 . In September my husband and I had to flee our home near Lida/GHETTO in the east of Poland/GPE and leave behind all our belongings . My husband had been working as a forester there . In all the awful chaos caused by the immense floods of refugees on all sides we finally ended up in Wilno/GHETTO where the Russians were – for the time being – not generally deporting people . In the east of Poland/GPE by contrast the mass deportation of the Polish population continued in earnest . My mother and brother were among those deported and my mother sadly died somewhere in the depths of – most likely from hunger . My husband got a job as a railway worker not far from Kaunas/CAMP whilst I found an opening for a stage designer at a travelling theatre which attracted mostly amateurs who had previously practised intellectual careers . The Russian NKVD People Commissariat for Internal Affairs had an extremely poor opinion of intellectuals so they had to assume a cover activity . It was in this very theatre that Masza Perewoska was working as a prompter her husband Lazarz was a trader and together they had an 8 year old daughter called Lilka . Masza was a good colleague – I went to see her at her house once but our friendship developed any further than that . Just before the outbreak of the war between Germany/GPE and Russia/GPE the Russians started with their abominable deportations of the Polish population from Wilno/GHETTO too . This was followed by the German occupation . My husband made the decision at this point to return to our home to resume his work as a forester . The plan was that I be far behind travelling in a truck from Lida/GHETTO as you needed to have a special permit to be able to travel by train . In the next few days I was on my way to see the seamstress when I passed Masza apartment . I thought I would just pop in quickly to say goodbye . I found the whole family busy packing as an order had been issued for all Jews to move into the ghetto . There was a lot of commotion but not a hint of panic since at this stage nobody knew that all of the Jews who were moved to the ghetto would be condemned to extermination . Even later on the Jews in the ghetto believe that this was the case but it was common knowledge in the town that the Jews being transported en masse away from the ghetto in trucks were being taken to Ponary/LOC a wooded area of Wilno/GHETTO where they would be shot dead . As we said our goodbyes Masza husband jokingly said to me want to get some forged Aryan papers for Masza and Lilka . If we did manage to do that you could then take both of them home with you. I laughed along to be polite and went on my way . I finally arrived home sick and tired having travelled there from Lida/GHETTO on a truck that belonged to the mayor who was an acquaintance of ours . 2 Our lovely little home that we had lovingly set up as our own just before the war had been completely ransacked . We had to borrow flour for bread and other food from the farmers we knew . I stayed in bed for weeks on end and stop thinking about Masza . I slowly reached the decision that I had to rescue Masza and Lilka from the ghetto . I know why but I simply shake the idea that they were worth risking our lives for . When I first mentioned it to my husband he thought it was nothing more than a pipe dream and he take me seriously at all . As I was still ill I travelled to Wilno/GHETTO in November to see a doctor . While I was there I was also going to collect someone we knew to come and help us around the house – we had promised them this beforehand . The doctor prescribed me more bed rest but instead I spent days walking around the town trying to find Masza despite the cold and wet weather conditions . I heard that she was working in the kitchen at the Gestapo building . So then I spent a few days watching the groups of Jews that left the ghetto every day to go to work but Masza was not among them . In the end I decided to simply go to the Gestapo building even though just walking past it was enough to give me goose bumps . I stopped a young Jewish girl working there and asked after Masza . She thought I was mad and with fear in her eyes quickly whispered that I should leave right away . But I carried on looking for Masza . I paid a visit to a student I knew who now worked in a factory . When I was there I saw a Jew who went to this same factory every day to work . I finally had a way to reach Masza ! This factory worker agreed to take my letter to Masza in the ghetto . Masza and I were able to meet up several times at the home of some German railway workers who were staying in Masza friend apartment and who were often able to pull her out of the ghetto under the pretext that they needed her to help them out around the house . I was feverish – all I could think about was how I would now be able to pull off my plan . I had to source the Aryan papers baptism certificates and travel permits all myself . I have any experience of this sort of thing at all and I certainly have the money for it . My main strategy was to sell some of Masza jewellery – on the black market of course . I then spent days talking to all sorts of people to make all the necessary arrangements . During this time I came across some real idealists as well as some genuine scoundrels but it was mostly just young . Obviously these people had risked their lives and sometimes they also had to off the Germans . A group of these young men that I was meeting up with on an almost daily basis one day suddenly stopped showing up . It turned out that they had actually been murdered by the Germans ... Eventually I had my hands on the forged baptism certificates . However when collecting the travel permits that I had been promised and had already paid for I was told that Masza would have to go to the police in person for the collection . This was absolutely out of the question as she clearly looked Jewish . Even Jews that had a very appearance would generally not dare do this and understandably so . I was in despair . One day I found out from Masza friend that the night before there had been a big selection at the ghetto . Masza and her family had actually been among those chosen to be sent to Ponary but at the last minute a Gestapo chief had decided to keep back his workers . Every single day there was 3 a chance that this could happen again . I had run out of strength and had no idea what I should do next . I got in touch with a young geography professor Mr Kola Taranowski who agreed that Lilka could stay with him for a few days until I had managed to get hold of the travel permits . However there was simply nowhere to get forged permits from and the truck from Lida/GHETTO materialise either . Suddenly events moved forward at such a speed that it seemed to me that I had lost all control of the situation and was somehow stuck on a mill wheel . I found Masza at her friend apartment filled with despair and desperation because they were expecting another at the ghetto the following night . This meant that she could not go back there . The professor who had already taken in Lilka and a few other Jews agreed to offer Masza a safe haven for a few hours . Poor Professor Taranowski and his beautiful young wife were later killed by the Germans because of the help he offered to the Jews . Physically exhausted I ran to see various acquaintances and begged them to give Masza somewhere to stay for one night . But I had no luck whatsoever . Tears were frozen to my face as I went back to the professor home that night having failed in my mission . That kind brave man agreed to let Masza stay with him until the next day . In the morning I continued with my pilgrimage with a heavy heart . However this time some friends of my husband said they were willing to take Masza in for a few days . In the meantime Masza actually had the opportunity to travel to Lida/GHETTO illegally . I was due to find her there where she would be staying with a Jew who was living at the rectory and working there as a gardener . So at this stage the situation got a little bit easier . I plucked up the courage to go to the German railway official to get myself a travel permit . Luckily for me he spoke French as I still speak a word of German back then . I explained to him that I needed to return to my husband who was a head forester and he issued a permit in my name without any trouble at all . When I reached the door I turned around and casually said with a smile on my face I almost forgot ! Could you add plus child please? Without any hesitation he wrote child on the slip and that was that . Now I would be able to take Lilka to Lida/GHETTO with me ! The very next day the two of us boarded the train . I was incredibly nervous . Would the three of us manage to be reunited in the home we longed to reach ? Or would we be caught and shot ? Would we find Masza in Lida/GHETTO ? What would my husband say when I arrived home with a Jewish woman and girl rather than Ms B. who I had promised to collect ? These questions just kept going round and round in my head . Luckily Lilka followed my advice on the train and spoke to the other people on board as little as possible . They would have undoubtedly recognised her Jewish accent immediately . Once we reached Lida/GHETTO I again found myself looking for Masza and it took hours . It transpired that the Jewish live at the rectory at all and then had been too scared to let Masza stay with him so she was forced to go to the ghetto in Lida/GHETTO . When she was there she was given the address of a midwife who offered her a place to stay in the end . That was where we found Masza . She was very distressed having lost almost all hope of seeing us again . Not to mention that there was a huge risk of being betrayed on either the Christian or Jewish side . Lilka and I spent the night at the rectory and the next 4 day Masza joined us so we could all travel back home together in a truck . The priests were privy to everything that was happening and were nothing but friendly and kind . Lilka slept closely by my side and I felt like a second mother to her given that I wanted to give her back the gift of life . The next day I had to continue to fight for our lives . I had found out from the priests that the Germans would be searching every single vehicle on the roads thoroughly since you needed a permit if you wished to travel . But of course Masza did not have one . They also told me that on several occasions the Germans had found Jews and then shot all of the passengers in the vehicle without a second thought . The priests prepared a wonderful feast ready for when Masza arrived wrapped up in a huge piece of cloth like a peasant . Masza who had spent the past few months of her life feeling like a deer being hunted now felt as though she had stepped right into a dream as she sat down at the beautifully laid table and joined in conversations with her fellow companions ... The truck arrived later that afternoon and Masza said goodbye to those lovely priests . Outwardly I was silent but this was because the me was stuck in a trance . I had spotted the mayor driver out in the courtyard and kept a close eye on everything that was playing out in front of me . When he saw Masza and Lilka near the truck his eyes widened . But before he had time to utter a single word I had slipped a litre bottle of vodka which I had prepared for precisely this situation into his pocket and called to Masza to hurry up . I joined them in the truck and introduced Masza as my friend to a few people I knew . I then instinctively hid her back in the dark corner so she be easy to spot . Every time the truck stopped even for a split second I thought that must be it – the Germans would be there to check and it would all be over . The truck came to a halt and I stared as though hypnotised into the tarpaulin that was now being lifted up . To my relief I saw that it was the mayor – the owner of the truck . He said hello to me and then looked surprised when he spotted Masza and Lilka . Before he could speak though I quickly began to tell him – in great detail – all about what it was like in Wilno/GHETTO and I explained that I had just brought my friend back home with me . He said he knew about this and had promised my husband that he would give me a ride . But he then went on to point out that I in fact had two women with me . I quickly replied countering his point with a laugh and by saying that there was indeed just one woman and the other was no more than a child . He finished by asking whether he was right to assume that we all had our travel permits with us . I confirmed immediately that of course that was the case . The mayor went back to the driver at that point and to my relief we started moving again . My nerves still let up for a single second . I kept the people I knew in the truck busy by talking to them a lot so they have chance to concern themselves with Masza and Lilka . The police commandant who was heading in the same direction as us did start to talk to Lilka however . Masza and I were absolutely petrified because Lilka speak very good Polish she went to a Jewish school but that poor little girl carefully considered every word and make a single mistake . The journey seemed to us to be lasting forever . The truck stopped frequently almost making my heart stop every time but we were lucky enough to avoid checks by the Germans . We finally arrived at the destination we were so desperate to reach late at night and it took us 10 minutes to get home from there . My husband was thrilled to see me again . To start with he 5 notice anything in particular about Masza because it was dark . He just thought that brought someone else I knew back with me instead . It until after had supper that he came to speak to me in the kitchen . With a look of fear on his face he said to me a Jew she? I stayed calm and collected replying with a simple yes . My husband soon accepted the situation and welcomed Masza in as part of the family . I was so grateful to him for his reaction and I had already decided that if the Germans found out about what we were doing I would say that my husband had no idea that Masza was Jewish . The first few months were extremely challenging . We spent hours trying to come up with ways we could make Masza face hairstyle and clothing as Aryan as possible but we have much luck . Whenever I introduced her to people I could see it in their eyes straight away that they knew the truth ... It was even worse because our house seemed to be full of all kinds of people all day long . The table was more or less set constantly . We were in a very dangerous situation now as word had gotten around that a Jewish woman was living with the head forester our friends had discussed it amongst themselves and decided that we had been given a lot of gold for what we were doing . In many other cases the Germans had heard rumours of this kind and started investigations which had led them to visit houses under suspicion and kill everyone living there without any further consideration . The woman living in our house with her posed a huge risk too . Lilka had not had a very good education and it was hard work for me to get her to learn anything during her Polish lessons – she simply want to follow them . Afterwards she was an extremely kind hearted and well behaved girl . I must have a sixth sense as the first thing I did was teach her the Maria . I also told her that if anyone ever asked her how she knew the prayer she should tell them that her grandmother taught her it when she was just a little girl . It just so happened that a few days later our neighbour children asked her whether she knew this very prayer . Lilka was able to recite it and the children then went on to ask her how she knew it . And Lilka knew exactly what to say . But this just went to show that people had their suspicions about our house . At least the neighbours had been reassured that Lilka was in fact a Christian child . Common folk on the whole posed less of a threat since they so sensitive to people being different or not having a pure accent given that they had their own ways and mannerisms . There certainly were some people though who noticed even the slightest of nuances in speech and behaviour . These were the ones who could soon turn into enemies ... The winter passed by and Masza worked really hard on running the household . By the time summer arrived we had a little more to eat but we were living in truly turbulent times . During the day we had to fear the Germans who were making all sorts of arrests . When night fell the Russian partisans went on a rampage killing people at random and burning houses down to the ground . For weeks my husband either slept in the or stayed with friends and people we knew . I never went to bed without a revolver a garden shovel and a kitchen knife so I had a chance of defending myself if it came to it . In the middle of 6 August my husband was arrested with a group of people . A Gestapo inspector we knew intervened and my husband was released together with a few others in other areas everyone that was arrested was shot without exception . Even in the face of all of this danger there was still no question in my mind that Masza and Lilka should continue to stay with us . The overnight raids by the Russian partisans had become so frequent by this point that I was a complete nervous wreck . We decided to move to Lida/GHETTO for a while so we would have to be worried about the Germans and the bombings . We managed to find two tiny little rooms in the suburbs . Masza carried on working temporarily as an office assistant to the second head forester but a few weeks later she got a phone call and the person on the other end of the line asked for her by her real name ... She had no choice but to leave immediately . The place we were staying in Lida/GHETTO was around 100 m away from the Gestapo building and there was a steady stream of strangers at our home . Full of despair I turned to the commander of the Polish resistance movement for help . He was in fact able to offer his assistance and arranged for Masza to live on a farm pretending to be the wife of a Polish officer . However it long before she and Lilka had to be moved to another farm . When it work out there either they both came back to me in Lida/GHETTO . After another few weeks we managed to place her still in the guise of a Polish officer wife with Lilka in a large home as a gardener . She stayed there for a few months sharing a large room with Lilka and having plenty to eat . She even travelled to Lida/GHETTO once all alone on a horse and cart to visit me . Unfortunately our luck last long and rumours soon started to spread around the area that Masza was a Jew . As far as I was concerned we had no choice but to have them stay with us in our two little rooms again . The situation we were in now was enormously dangerous . The Gestapo was very close by my husband had a lot of people visit him for business including Germans and we still had a large number of strangers coming to our home . But I still just send Masza and Lilka away . And so they stayed with us until the very end . The ghettos in all of the towns in the local area were in . We could hear nothing but gunshots from every direction . Everyone who came to visit us filled us in on the details ... We were all shocked and upset but we had to keep playing the part convincingly and seem to the outside world that we were indifferent so as to mitigate any suspicion we may have been under . As I had done many times before I had to brush off the comments of all the people who would say is a Jew she? with a laugh as if they had told a funny joke . With a view to wiping out all suspicion entirely Masza spoke really angrily about these comments the next day at the table forcing some of the men there to apologise to her . Masza had decided to travel to Germany/GPE with Lilka as a voluntary worker as she would be able to get by more easily there . Her husband who had been rescued when the ghetto in Wilno/GHETTO was liquidated and was now living in hiding had agreed to this new plan . So Masza and Lilka travelled to Konstanz/CAMP meaning they were closer to the Swiss border . Two weeks later Lida/GHETTO was bombed very heavily by the Russians . Going 7 back to our house in the country an option for us as the Gestapo was searching for my husband . Our response was to flee to Warsaw/GPE and we were taken in by some friends living near to the city . I had ventured into the city at the moment that the insurrection broke out and I turn back . I see my husband again . I was taken from Warsaw/GPE to Breslau/GPE as a slave labourer . I fled from there and made my way to Konstanz/LOC where I hoped to find Masza and Lilka . Masza was working very hard for a gardener in Konstanz/LOC and I had no choice but to work in a factory . I got an extremely serious case of pleurisy but I still had to go to work despite suffering from a fever with a temperature of 39 degrees . The German doctor give me any medicine either so I believed I was going to die . I had no strength left in me . Luckily in spring with the French very close Switzerland/GPE opened its borders meaning we were able to leave Germany/GPE . Once we were in Switzerland/GPE I was detained in the same camp as Masza and Lilka to start with but then I was moved to a different one . I then managed to get a temporary job as a graphic designer at the Polish museum in Rapperswil/LOC . I suffered through many difficult years after this . My poor health stopped me from taking on any arduous work and this is still the case now . I tried to look for my husband when I was still in Germany/GPE and then from Switzerland/GPE but I had no luck whatsoever . It was only two years later that I heard from the Red Cross that he had died in Dachau/CAMP . In the meantime Masza had decided to return to her husband who had since turned up in Prague/GPE . All three of them subsequently emigrated to Israel/GPE . Masza and Lazarz now work in office jobs whilst Lilka is happily married to a doctor as of this year . 1 It has been assumed that ‘ Fernrussland/LOC is a description of the general location within Russia/GPE rather than an official place name . 2 It has been assumed that Masza/LOC and Lilka/LOC are being referred to here and that ‘ mit ihren Kindern in the plural should actually be in the singular . 3 It has been assumed that ‘ Scheine is a typographical error in the original source document and should instead read ‘ Scheune barn . 
Samuel his parents sister and brother Werner were deported from Krefeld/CAMP to the ghetto in Riga/GHETTO on 15 December 1941 . Two days before their arrival there Latvian Jews had been slaughtered in the same rooms now occupied by the new arrivals . After a week in Riga/CAMP the brothers Heinz and Werner were sent to Salaspils/CAMP camp for 8 months there Jews out of had been murdered . A notorious mass murderer in the Riga/GHETTO Ghetto was Oberstf . Krause November 1943 . Werner and Heinz were transported to Camp Dondangen/CAMP Vernichtungslager/CAMP . Heinz worked for the Armee Bekleidungsamt . SS Dr. Krebsbach selected the inmates for the annihilation camp Stutthof/CAMP only 200 out of inmates remained in the camp of the Armee Bekleidungsamt . Hauptscharführer Bruener was the notorious commandant of the camp Libau/CAMP where to Heinz Samuel had been sent . From there he was transported to Hamburg/CAMP and remained for 7 weeks in Fuehlsbuettel/CAMP concentation camp . A new transfer took him to C.C. Kiel/CAMP the commandant there SS Stf . Baumann demonstrated every night his shooting practice by killing 30 inmates . On 1 May 1945 the Danish Red Cross Swedish ? liberated the completely exhausted inmates . 4 . Date December 1941 May 1945 . 5 . Number of pages 4 . 6 . Author or Source Heinz Samuel . 7 . Recorded by as above . Heinz Samuel Experiences in Concentration Camps in Latvia/GPE On the 11th of December 1941 we were deported from Krefeld/CAMP to Riga/GHETTO . Our luggage which we had with us was completely taken away . Two days before our arrival in the ghetto something dreadful had taken place . Out of Latvian Jews only 5000 were left there . All the others were executed by the governing authorities with the help of the Latvian SS . We found the apartments in a devastated condition and had to wade through the blood of those murdered . To report on all of this is too much . Before we had settled into the ghetto there were still more victims . At the beginning there were 17 of us accommodated in a small room . The question of food gave us a lot of concern . We received rations for 14 days which only sufficed for two . We attempted through bartering to obtain a bit more . But for bartering stood the death penalty . Numerous people were hanged or shot for this offense . We men had to make a 7 hour march to the port in snow and ice and carry out heavy work there . Our food was frozen turnips which we found . When we returned from work hungry children stood at the fence and waited for a piece of bread or turnip which perhaps would be taken into the ghetto at the risk of one life . Our dear father who was suffering from severe heart problems did not have to work . On the 22nd of December 1941 Werner and I went with a large transport of men into the well known death camp Salaspils/CAMP 17 kilometres from Riga/GHETTO . We took our leave from our relatives with heavy hearts . The majority marched unsuspectingly to their deaths . Of people met their deaths in a mass grave . Vermin the lack of any possibility to wash and completely inadequate nutrition were the causes of numerous hangings and shootings . On the 11th of April 1942 even our Werner was sentenced to hang because he had money with him at a control check but thank God he was reprieved at the last minute because we were liked by the camp leadership . Our boxing gloves which we always carried with us brought us some advantage . This hell without any news of our loved ones lasted for 8 months . Then the rest of us returned half dead to the ghetto . Meanwhile our dear father had died through starvation . Our mother and younger sister were very thin the hunger was too great . Many of our friends never found their relatives they had been dragged off by the SS and eliminated . Mother had also been selected but was released . Many transports which came to us were led directly from the tracks to the woods and disposed of in a mass grave by machine guns and hand grenades . Our friends had to dig out the mass grave the day before under tight security . In the ghetto there were people from Cologne/LOC Dusseldorf/LOC Prague/GPE Vienna/GPE Berlin/GPE etc . men and women went in columns to individual SS and military units for heavy work . There were daily shootings and hangings . Mother worked in the ghetto and took care of the household of 8 people amongst whom were also Mally Kaufman Paula Davids and Julius Winter 3 . Sister Ruth worked in a big scrapyard and had to unload heavy iron parts . She requested that I go there and I was put to use there as a welder . Above all the possibility existed of a piece of bread or other food which I received in recognition for my work from the Latvian workers and took home to our loved ones . The joy was great but even greater was the danger bringing it into the ghetto . Our mother and sister recovered again very well and they lived very happily together apart from the anxiety which they had daily when Obersturmführer simply took innocent people mainly mothers who had to feed their children to the cemetery and shot them because of food abuse . At the beginning of June 1943 a lot of Jews were sent to Torf . Even Ruth had to go . I was reclaimed as a skilled worker and was able to remain with my mother and sister . At this time a new concentration camp was constructed in Riga/GHETTO Kaiserwald/CAMP . Bit by bit the ghetto was shut down . It was the first time that we lads were split up . I would have liked to have gone with him voluntarily but on the other hand I also did not want to leave my mother and sister alone . We took our leave with heavy hearts and cried like children . Even Werner had luck this time and was the camp eldest in the death camp Dondangen/CAMP . My ‘ command was also disbanded and I had luck I was assigned to the Military Clothing Authority as a plumber . This department stayed to the last in the ghetto and so I was able to continue with our life together . Only through my job was I able to manage to release my mother and sister from the horrible camp . Kaiserwald/CAMP . We often had to unload quarantine trains day and night . Ruth came back from Torf/CAMP with a septic leg on the 24th of October 1943 . In the meantime her parents were no longer here . She brought food with her which she had earned after work through tailoring for the director of the Torf factory . In between that our little sister went by command to the military hospital . It was 4 hours walking but she came home proudly in the evening with bread and potatoes in her rucksack which she received as a present there and felt like the ‘ bread winner of the family . It is terrible what that child had to do through those horrible years . After I was sick in January with diphtheria it went well with us until the dreadful November of 1943 . When I came home from work I found a deadly silence in the ghetto instead of happy children greeting their parents and brother and sisters from work . Here and there was a light burning and I heard horrible weeping and howling . When I entered our flat I discovered it in the same circumstances as we found it in December 1941 but mother and sister were not there . I ran round the entire house and looked but in vain . After a long time I found Ruth again . She had sought accommodation with Mendel from Kempen/CAMP who was a witness to the events of the day . At 8 in the morning there came the order for all children and old people to report . After that the entire ghetto had to fall in . The people were driven from the houses by the SS with revolvers drawn . They had to go to the muster place for ‘ selection by the murderer Krause . The fate of these poor people was decided by a nod of the head of this criminal . They had to immediately climb in to large vehicles and were loaded into train wagons . From there there was no trace . Many young mothers hid their children and gave them sleeping powder to avoid any screaming or crying but most of them were discovered by the criminals . The general mood in the ghetto was now terrible . The few people who remained had lost almost all of their relatives . We remained in the ghetto until the 6th of November 1943 and then were quartered at the Military Clothing Authority . People who had children under 10 had to remain in the ghetto and in a repeat action went the same way as our loved ones . We who were assigned to the Military Clothing Department had to all be registered via the Kaiserwald/CAMP Camp . There many of us were retained and badgered by the murderers . We arrived in the camp of the Military Clothing Authority . The work was very difficult and rations were scarce . We bartered the clothes of our loved ones in order not to die of hunger . We put on very thin prisoner uniforms . Both men and women had their hair cut off completely . Ruth went twice to the military hospital with a high fever and came home . I secretly left camp and begged in a neighbouring house for medicine and food . I wanted to give the good lady the shirt that I still wore but she said that the Lord would reward her for it . Then another bad day came . The last children who were still with us were fetched by the SS . There were terrible scenes . The parents had to hand over to the SS their own children . Small children who were sometimes smuggled illegally and with difficulty from the ghetto into the camp now ended up in the wood where so many of our fellow Jews found their death . When the Russians came once again an ‘ Action took place and 76 people from our camp found their death . This selection was done by SS Doctor Kräbsbach . After this our camp was reduced from 1500 to 200 people . All the rest were sent to the well known death camp Stutthof/CAMP . Again most relatives were snatched away . However through satisfactory work which pleased the criminals Ruth and I managed to be one of the last selected . 140 people went by boat to Libau/LOC also Ruth had to go . 50 men and 10 women remained behind . After 14 days we also went to Libau/LOC and joined again with the 140 people . Our commander now was Hauptscharführer Brüner who also had a lot of people on his conscience . By now there were heavy air raids by the Russians . Half of Ruth face was burnt by an incendiary bomb which fell in the slit trench . After an operation on my hand I was assigned as a heating engineer and often had to work through the night . We stayed in Libau/LOC until the 19th of February 1945 and then we were transported by ship to Hamburg/CAMP . After we were transferred by the SS to the prison of the Concentration Camp Fühlsbüttel . We stayed for 7 weeks in this hell . Our strength ebbed away from day to day . 60 of our comrades were sent to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP . On the 14th of April 1945 we had to fall in . We were given 750 grams of bread and 100 grams of margarine which had to last for 4 days . Immediately after that we marched 100 kilometres to Kiel/LOC supervised by the SS . The first day we walked 30 kilometres . We could barely move because our bodies were already too weak from previous exertions . We fed ourselves only on turnips which we found and even for that there were kicks and blows . We arrived there after 4 days . We were greeted with the words from the SS Führer and camp commander You synagogue servants will have it good with me . We had to undertake exhumation work in bomb damaged house in the city of Kiel/LOC and during it we were treated disgracefully . Every evening SS – Führer Baumann displayed his shooting ability and as a result 30 camp inmates had to die . The camp inmates were now only skeletons and we were so far gone that our legs could hardly carry us . Our legs and feet were badly swollen with water . On the 30th of April we had to put on the dirty and blood stained clothing of those who had been shot the previous evening . With this action we did not see anything good for us because many comrades had already had to take their last walk in torn clothes . We were already too indifferent to think . We had no strength left for life or death . Then an unbelievable miracle happened for us . The Danish Red Cross fetched us the next day the 1st of May 1945 out of the hell the memory of which will be with us for the rest of our lives and took us to a priceless freedom . This report is only a fraction of our frightful experiences . 
the author and his two brothers tried to escape from the unbearable conditions in the KZ Kaiserwald/CAMP and their work in the Ortskommadantur they were caught and sent to ABA 701 forced labour . There they had to suffer cruel punishments and sadistic atrocities the author accuses the Unteroffiziere Müller and Schwellenbach . Dr. Josef Lagerarzt would warn Schwellenbach in vain of the possibly fatal consequences of his cruelty . The author declares himself ready to repeat his statement under oath before any magistrate . Evidence Against Unteroffizier Franz Schwellenbach Stockholm/LOC 3 September 1947 . Regarding Testifying against former Unteroffizier Franz Schwellenbach when he served in Riga/LOC . The signatory hereby states that he has provided a truthful report on Schwellenbach character as evidence of how the latter behaved in an inhumane manner . The signatory had to experience first hand the disgraceful deeds that Schwellenbach was capable of . I am ready to repeat this statement under oath before any magistrate at any time . At the time in question my two brothers and I were taken from Kaiserwald/CAMP Concentration Camp near Riga/LOC every day to work in the Ortskommandantur . Life in the concentration camp and where we worked was unbearable . This prompted us to put an end to this once and for all by escaping from this degrading life . Unfortunately our attempt was unsuccessful and we were sent to the Army Clothing Centre 701 which was also in Riga/LOC for forced labour . Once they had brought us to the Clothing Centre the commandant of this camp Unteroffizier Mueller gave us 25 lashes each and then continued to strike us . We were then sent to the forced labour group Schwellenbach was the head of this unit . Despite receiving our punishments from the commandant this did not seem to be enough for Schwellenbach and he set about persecuting us in dreadful ways . He tortured us using every trick in the book including making us carry a large stack of wood beams which were 5 metres in length for approx . 500 metres at a run . At this stage I would like to emphasise that this was not work that needed to be done – its sole purpose was to torture us . We were working in 30 degree heat and { we } were close to collapsing . If we were unable to keep up with the pace at any point through no fault of our own as we were weak Schwellenbach would relentlessly beat us with a truncheon . The less we could stand the pace as time went by the more Schwellenbach would beat us . This ended with us fainting and collapsing covered in blood . You would have thought that this would be the end of it . 2 On the contrary our Lagerarzt camp doctor Dr Josef came and could see Schwellenbach knelt over us after we had collapsed punching us etc . in an effort to bring us round to consciousness . Dr Josef told him that our lives were at risk so Schwellenbach then threw buckets of water over us . The doctor was not able to attend to us at all as Schwellenbach could not be deterred from his actions in any way . Schwellenbach sprained his foot when he kicked us – this was the only thing we have to thank for this procedure being brought to an end . On the many occasions that we lay there unconscious Schwellenbach would use water to try and bring us round . It actually worked but each time it indicated to him that he should start beating us again . Once it got to the point where nobody would have believed we were still alive Schwellenbach dragged us into a dark basement where we had to lie in the most awful conditions . We were forbidden from having any medical assistance whatsoever . Although I laid there for a while with a high fever and continued to be persecuted by Schwellenbach in every way imaginable I believe it was down to fate that I am still here today to testify against him . My case and that of my brothers is not an isolated incident . There is evidence that Schwellenbach without any authorisation treated us Jews in such an inhumane manner out of pure personal pleasure . I hope that Schwellenbach receives just punishment . Signed JAKOB GALANTER . I herewith certify that the above is a correct copy of the German original . FOR THE PUBLIC RELATIONS SUB COMMITTEE . Chairman 
author was arrested in Vienna/GPE on 28 May 1938 . Before the start and during the deportation to Dachau/CAMP the prisoners had to endure the most sadistic cruelties p.1 . Forced labour in the camp carrying stone blocks of 30 40 kg . Punishments public whipping tree hanging standing to attention for three hours exhausting exercises etc . p.2 3 . The Camp Commandant was Grunewald p.2 . Buchenwald/CAMP was even worse . Whipping commandant Redi no water no Sunday rest some times half rations no smoking no letters p.3 4 . Unbelievable atrocities after 8 November 1938 . This report includes details of an execution in the presence of prisoners of an internee who had tried to escape and was caught . From the gallows he greeted his fellow sufferers with a laugh whilst the involuntary hangman was shuddering at his task p.5 6 . 9 . References 10 . Remarks The author died in London/GPE in 1949 . My Experience in the Concentration Camps Dachau/CAMP And Buchenwald/CAMP A short extract of my martyrdom and of my frightful experiences in the hell of the concentration camps Dachau/CAMP and Buchenwald/CAMP in which I was nine months long a prisoner . I will begin with my arrest in Vienna/GPE on 28th May 1938 . This was in the early morning when a man in plain clothes sought me out in my parents home and summoned me in a friendly tone to accompany him telling me it was a question of supplying a little information and I should return home in about half an hour . He brought me to the police station where I was only asked if I were a Jew and on saying Yes was thrown into prison where there were already several hundreds who knew no more than I. But we had no longer to wait the first transport was soon sent off in which I found myself . There were about 700 of us driven in armoured cars to the otherwise peaceful West/LOC Station/LOC . The next picture was one of the most terrible . We were crowded in the cars like animals and placed round the Station were S.S./LOC men armed with machine guns who now set about us with their hand weapons until they had established a blood bath . When more than half experienced wounding and several were dead the death train left the Station . This found me with a broken finger and four teeth missing . As yet however the worst was to come when later the beasts started on us in the train itself . We were ordered by the sodden barbarians to gaze in the glaring light sun during the whole journey . Obviously this was impossible and we were then treated to blows kicks and shots until we were almost insane . However we got to Munich/GPE is still a puzzle to me today . Yet it was so . As we alighted we were treated much about the same as we were when on the Station at Vienna/GPE . From Munich/GPE to Dachau/CAMP we were dispatched in cattle trucks . We were lucky to have such gloomy trucks as these for not one of the cowardly hounds would enter . We were choked with blood and sweat and nearly unconscious from thirst when we reached this hell . It was almost like a funeral for as we marched to the gates of Dachau/CAMP Camp we carried the dead bodies of those who had suffered at the 2 Murderers hands at the head of the procession . After a short call of the murdered Grunewald the Camp commandant addressed us wherein he intimated that the guns of the beasts of guard go off quite easily . We were shorn bald and brought into barracks . We then received rough convict uniform and at last after more than 40 hours torture were given food and drink and the opportunity to lie down on straw . A short sleep and then off to work . Work is a fine word . Off on a torture trip . We each carried a stone block of 30 40 4 stones and a half to five stones weight which we had to carry the whole day long on dusty roads temperature often 40 deg Centigrade about 110 deg . Farenheit and without hats so that we all suffered a sunstroke . Numbers fell unconscious together . They were roughly brought round with water and must continue to walk . Bad enough this torture but this was yet the worst . One day we marched out and formed a parade ground in which was set up a block or post . The guards in full equipment arrived at this place and we saw a terrible picture public whipping . With animal strength they threshed helpless men whose groans were heart rending . After this devlish game the Death Head S.S. guards were grinning like devils . Such an unhappy experience as this torture happened to me when after gruelling work I fell unconscious . I was brought before the dog Grunewald commandant and asked why I had refused to work . To this nonsensical question I could give no answer and so he pronounced sentence Treehanging . My hands were bound with chains and I was placed backwards to a tree trunk and bound so high that my feet could not reach the ground . I held this out for roughly 20 minutes and then cried out . This was a bad move for I was whipped and placed higher on the tree and not released until 12 1-Feb hours on the torture stake . To come out of this witches cauldron alive was quite exclusive but besides these tortures a little example of some of the other fine things this mob did . On one occasion a small piece of bread was found lying in a barrack . Punishment twelve days Torstehen for all prisoners living in the vicinity . There were 2000 of us affected . By Torstehen the following 3 is meant . After tiring work and with hungry stomachs and thirsty throats remain standing to attention until sufficiently punished and that was roughly three hours . So our food was delayed and shortened with 30 days on half bread I can forget this but when I think of the punishment exercises I still cry out hopping jumping running knees bend creeping on the floor until we were exhausted . Anyone must see that not a day passed without many deaths . And now a trifle about the good watchmen . Some of these tyrants had hardly passed their 18th year . I was working in a pit which was already over 4 metres 4 yards and a half deep . When I stopped to wipe the sweat from my forehead I heard a command which ordered me to report to one of such youth . As quick as I could I jumped out of the pit grave and reported myself to himj Jew in protective custody reports obediently to Herr Wachtmeister I said . This I had to repeat until I was even hotter ? but it was still too soft for him . After this fine performance he asked me why I had come to him . Because you called me was my answer . You lie he said and gave me a blow which knocked me backwards into the pit . Now out of it he bellowed . I sprang out in haste . What I could have done to him then would have cost my life for I was at the end of my nerves . Yet this performance was put about ten times like a fool I jumped in and out and this hound grinned . I can still remember that malevolent grin today exactly . Another case which did not concern me but cost a dear friend of mine his life . We were stone breaking when he was ordered by a headman to run to him . What he asked him I could not hear but I heard his bellowing command March march . My friend obeyed the command and the cowardly dog shot a bullet into his head . The excuse attempting to escape Comment superfluous . Of such episodes I could write books but I will leave Dachau/CAMP and write about the many fine ‘ goings on at Buchenwald/CAMP and about its commandant because there can remain no secretabout the brutality which helpless people are subjected to in present Germany/GPE . BUCHENWALD/CAMP may well be termed the worst camp in Germany/GPE because the brutality and 4 ness which are meted out there are not easily depicted in empty words . The criminal system on which it is built can he seen and judged on entering the camp . This transcription is written over the entrance Right or Wrong My Fatherland . Horrible the first impression . There one saw a half dead man before the commandant REDI whipped on the post two gigantic demons thrashing the poor fellow frightful to behold it . Yet a stroke and yet another but no sound came from the helpless one no movement to be seen . He is dead . Only then do they yield to the corpse no pity no compassion . They bellow for two prisoners it is carried away . Yet another horrible sight is to be seen . A column passes by broken men they carry a band on the arm on which is written bloed insane . They carry a heavy burden of stone one follows the other they can hardly move it . No pity a Beath Head moves amongst them and cruelly whips them forward . Gan one liken these dogs to men ? No and again No . And this is where we must live . We have had already some experience and were quite apathetic I reckoned no more with my life because after human estimates it was impossible . Little to eat no drinking water it was infected no water in general we could only wash once a week . Five men had to sleep on two straw sacks . Lousy blankets so that nearly all of us suffered from an eruption . And on top of this the work until late in the evening with no Sunday rest . Thus one day passed the same as the next ? work blows work blows . We were already used to it and feared only more horrible surprises . And what we feared promptly turned up . It was on November 3rd when a frightful order reached us half rations no medical facilities no smoking no letters . Buried alive . Every day we carried bodies from the rooms . I was unfortunately in the body carrying column . I carried many friends out on my shoulder thinking One day I also shall be carried out I am nearing my end . Yet the foregoing account is nothing to the unbelievable brutalities of 11th November 1938 and the following weeks . It was the great round up of prisoners after the attempt on Rath in Paris/GPE . The bloodhounds arrested men cripples and even children of 11 and 12 years and brought them to the camp . How they attacked them is unbelievable . There was 5 not one of the more than in the camp who had at least a hole in his scalp . The roll call place where they mustered ressembled a veritable blood bath . They were placed in provisional barracks where 200 had previously been 200 were packed . No taking off clothes no washing the food that was thrown to them eaten with the hands picked from the filthy floor . In these conditions they lived for weeks . There was no lavatory accommodation for them and one just let nature take its course . An epidemic was unavoidable and it came in truth typhoid was rife in the camp . It sounds terrible and so it was indeed . Hundreds who became insane we had later to carry as corpses from the washrooms where we had put them . When children erred in the camp the Death — Heads did their duty . The whip did not rest they were pitilessly whipped thrashed murdered they had never asked for it . And in conclusion of my TRUE pictures of the brutalities which are perpetrated in the present day Germany/GPE I will yet open the eyes of the British people and tell of the execution of a man in the presence of more than prisoners . Two prisoners broke out one was quickly recaptured the other fled to Chechoslovakia/GPE . The other after short proceedings in Weimar/CAMP which is in the neighbourhood of the concentration camp was condemned to death and this the Gestapo determined to carry out in the camp itself . It was the day before Christmas 1938 . At 8 a.m. the signal went and a parading of prisoners took place in deep snow at 30 degrees Cels about 90 Farenehit under zero we had to watch the horrible end to which one of our friends was to come . At attention in the piercing cold we stood waiting for the next terrible minutes in our lives . We were so many yet we could not help him . The threatening machine guns were trained on us and one move from any other of us would have cost many lives . The searchlights also pla yed on us and in the middle of all this the gallows stood out . Soon we heard the words of the gangsters March him to the gallows . And with sallow face and raised head with quick steps went our friend Forster . Yet he greeted us with a laught while the Leath Heads threatened us . The hangman shaking put the noose around the neck of the unfortunate indeed the hangman shook for he was one of us a 6 prisoner and had to do the infamous act under the threats of the beasts . Let him go was intoned and a few minutes later there dangled an innocent sacrifice of the German barbarian tyranny . March — march bellowed the beasts and the death struggle continued . 

worked at the Belgian Ministry of Labour as a welfare officer . At the beginning of the year 1943 she joined the C.D.J. Comité de défense des Juifs in order to hide and help Jewish children . She describes the various departments and tasks of this organization p.1 and how the work was done in the children group to which she belonged some examples of the complicated rescue work p.2 5 7 . Reports on the extreme difficulties which had to be overcome in order to return a small child to his mother after the baby name had to be changed twice his mother had been known to be dead for years and the foster parents wanted to keep the child p.3 5 . Some people in Brussels/GPEwere still afraid of the Fünfte Kolonne when the occupation was over p.4 . Help from Catholic nuns Avenue Clémenceau deportation and imprisonment for other non Jews helping Jews Mr and Mrs Ovart and their daughter who had hidden Jewish children and adults pensionnat Gaty de Gamont p.6 . The author arrested twice could get away p.6 . Help from a police officer the Chief of the food office at Brussels/GPEgenerously helped out with ration cards p.6 7 . Repeatedly they succeeded to rescue the children under the nose of the Gestapo during the raids whilst the parents were arrested p.7 . 9 . Further References Resistance movement . Madame Jospa Ida Sterne p.1 . Convents p.2 5 6 . Mr Manaster Antwerp/LOC p.2 6 . Wezeembeek/CAMP p.2 3 . Malines p.3 6 . Maurice Heiber p.3 . Hospital/STREET St./STREET Pierre p.3 . Mr Tiefenbrummer director of German home for Jewish children in Belgium/GPE p.3 4 . CaféPlace Bara a hiding place place during raids p.5 . Jacques p.5 . Franck chief of the Camp at Malines p.6 . Police p.6 . The Rescue of Jewish Children in Belgium/GPE Andrée Geulen Herscovici is a social worker in the Belgian Ministry of Labour . During the years 1943 44 she took part in the rescue operation for Jewish children within the framework of the ‘ Comité de défense des Juifs . 1 ‘ CDJ organisation Comité de défense des Juifs 2 Personal responsibilities Reception and placement of the children Concealment of the illegal addresses even when it came to the parents 2 et seq . Episodes of Resistance work 3 et seqq . Attempt by the adoptive to prevent the return of the child 5 et seqq . Further episodes Rescue of the children in the Franciscan convent Heroic conduct of the Ovart family Evacuation of the children Help from Belgian during the acquisition of ration cards . Early in 1943 at the time when the roundups of the Jews where increasing by the day I met whilst at the home of some mutual friends a social worker who asked me if I wanted to help hide Jewish children . I said yes right away and that is how I ended up being part of the main aid organisation for Jews in Belgium/GPE during the last war the CDJ Comité de défense des Juifs . Within this organisation there were two sections the ‘ Adults section and the ‘ Children section the latter dealing exclusively with the placement of children . The work was divided into three groups . The 1st group directed by Madame Jospa was tasked with searching for places either through official charities Œuvre Nationale de JOC Aide Paysanne aux enfants des villes Foyers Leopold III etc … or with families preferably far from the cities . That is how many children were taken in by The 2nd group the placement centre directed by Ida Sterno was responsible for visiting the Jewish families who were still at their official addresses and who were appealing for our help to take away as soon as possible their children who risked every day being rounded up . These appeals reached the placement centre through various Jewish organisations the Zionist groups des Juifs de an organisation under German control but where we had allies . After visiting the family in order to determine the age of the children and their physical traits very important we would place them as and when places were found for us by the 1st group . The 3rd group carried out the administrative work . For each child it would create a FALSE identity after having noted down by means of a code the child TRUE identity as well as the address of the parents locking everything in a strongbox and a FALSE ration card noting the address of the caretakers or of the establishment where the child was hidden . A team of young girls would go visit the caretakers every month to bring ration stamps and to pay for the children keep . I worked in the 2nd group and it was my duty to go see the families who were asking for our help . I used to learn the names and addresses by heart in order to not make the Gestapo work easier were I to be arrested and searched by giving them a list of addresses . We would ask the parents to prepare the children suitcases and to keep them ready . In some cases the parents were asked to contribute financially . We would come by to pick up the children several days later and we were to take them either to convents to Homes in the country or to Belgian families who had willingly accepted to hide the persecuted children . We never placed Jewish children who had strong Semitic traits in communal institutions this so as to prevent them from being noticed too easily amongst the other children . When we took the children away we never used to tell the parents where we were hiding them . I realise how cruel it could be for the parents to entrust their children to an unknown woman we obviously could not say who we were we introduced ourselves in the name of the Resistance who would not even say where she was taking them . But this was an indispensable precautionary measure since experience had taught us that when we gave the addresses after forcing the parents to formally promise not to go see them they could not stop themselves from going and by doing so compromised the security of the children . Our organisation worked mainly in Brussels/GPEbut we also managed to hide children from Antwerp/LOC where a group had been formed under the direction of Mr Certain memorable episodes from this period . One day I was to take a two year old child Charles S. to stay with some peasants in Two children were already hidden there . I was to pick them up again so as to take them to another Home . When I arrived there I noticed that they both had scabies . Clearly I did not leave the little Charles and took him to the where I was staying so that I could find him another place . The pensionnat was raided that very night and the child was taken to Malines/LOC . The orphaned children were not sent to the camps but were placed in officially recognised Jewish Homes . Maurice Heiber who at the time was in Malines/LOC was able to help us retrieve the child whom we then placed in the Hôpital St. Pierre under the pretext that he had diphtheria . There he was made to ‘ die . Then he was placed with some gardeners under a FALSE name … Today he is a big fifteen year old boy who is studying to become a dental technician . … After the liberation all the children whose parents had not been deported were returned to their families . This went smoothly except for one boy whose mother almost never saw him again . But the circumstances surrounding his placement had been particularly difficult so instead just listen this child who was one year old had been taken out of the camp in Malines/LOC being entirely without a family the mother had jumped from the Gestapo lorry that was taking her to the camp and placed in a Home for Jewish children that was under German control . No one knew his TRUE identity and he was given his first new name . The director of the Home Mr Tiefenbrunner passed the child on to our clandestine organisation . Every now and then that was how a child could avoid detection twenty nine children would be declared to the Germans when in reality there were thirty and the thirtieth would be smuggled out . We placed the child under a second new name this one more French sounding with a notaire from Brussels/GPEwho asking for neither ration stamps nor money explicitly requested that the child was never visited . After the liberation the mother who had managed to stay hidden throughout the war came to claim the child from us … she had found out that he had never been deported from Malines and had been hidden by the clandestine organisation but she knew nothing ever since he had left Malines/LOC . She gave us the TRUE name of the child which was neither the first nor the second one he had received . Whence our first difficulty for nowhere in our files figured the TRUE name of the child . Essentially through the help of multiple photos and due to the fact that the child had been operated on for an inguinal hernia we realised that this was the unknown child whom we had taken from the Home of Mr Tiefenbrunner and placed with the notaire . We went with the mother to where this notaire was living and there we heard that the notaire had in fact had the child with him but had only kept him for several months and afterwards had given him back to the organisation . To whom ? He could not give a name … he had not asked for it when the child was brought to him he still had not asked for it when the child was taken away from him . The mother was desperate ! No one within our organisation remembered having been to take back the child but many were those amongst us who had been deported . How were we to know ? The notaire had asked for neither stamps nor money none of the ‘ had gone to see the child since his placement . What were we to do ? We placed a photo in the papers and made a public appeal whilst indicating the last known address in other words that of the notaire . The response was not long in coming we received a telephone call from the notaire furious who begged us to stop our searches since the Fifth Column was still around and he did not want a bomb being placed where he lived because he had kept a Jewish child during the occupation . At the same time he pointed out to us that he himself had lost a child during the war that he had well had to console himself and that the mother of our little missing boy just had to do the same . This last remark immediately roused our suspicions and gave us the keen conviction that the child was still with the notaire . Meanwhile we had found out that the notaire had a child staying with him who was the same age as the one whom we were searching for a child whom he had adopted following the death of the parents during a bombing . Despite our requests he refused to show us the child . At this point we decided to file a complaint and place the case in the hands of Justice . The judiciary police carried out a long inquiry questioning us all in turn time passed the mother began to despair of ever seeing her child again . Finally the police carried out a raid on the same day at the same time on all the properties belonging to the notaire and the child was found again … three years had gone by . The notaire and his wife had grown extremely attached to this little boy but who shall ever deny the cruelty of not returning a child to his TRUE mother especially after the suffering that she had endured during the war . … In/STREET Place/STREET Bara there was a back room in a café where all the Jews used to hide during roundups . There was a denunciation and everyone was arrested . The patronne of the café managed to save a little girl of about three or four . I was made responsible at the time for picking up this child . As she was on the first floor I first took down her suitcase . Having reached the corridor I found myself face to face with three men in civilian clothes one of whom had his arm in a sling . They asked for my papers which I immediately handed over . I pretended that I had to make a telephone call and found out that the man with his arm in a sling was the terrible Jacques . He had been injured by one of the men arrested in the café who had escaped from the transport and sworn to avenge himself . In the café there was unfortunately a couple that had also been able to escape from the transport but they too had been arrested again . The woman had just enough time to give me the address of her little boy in Deux/LOC Acren/LOC . What is more I had just been to see this child eight days earlier . This woman never came back . I was interrogated for two hours they wanted to know if I regularly went to see the Jews and if I had any addresses to give them . Finally they let me leave . They did not find the child who had been safely taken to a woman next door through the garden and we went to pick her up later … On avenue Clémenceau there was a group of French nuns who also used to shelter every now and then children whose parents had been arrested . At any given time there were about a dozen children who shared the life of the religious community . Following a denunciation the Gestapo came but the Mother Superior managed to mollify them by promising to dress the children to have them ready the following day . She immediately alerted the Resistance the partisans came to pick up the children and they staged a scene gagged the nuns cut the telephone line . That evening when the Gestapo returned the nuns were calling for help … … An act of heroism . In the pensionnat Gaty de Gamont there were 17 hidden children and 13 adults in the attic . Following a denunciation everyone was arrested . The directeur the and their daughter were put in prison Mr and Mme Ovart were deported to Germany/GPE and never came back . Their daughter was herself in prison for more than a year . … One day we received news from Malines informing us that Frank who was head of the camp had received a telegram ordering him to empty all the Homes of the AJB . It was nearly the end of the occupation . We accomplished the tour de force of clearing out the children from all the Homes in one day . When the German lorries arrived they found the houses empty . … The children who were taken in by the organisation for the most part did not have ration cards . They needed an attestation de to receive a new card . I was made responsible for obtaining these attestations for about fifty children from Antwerp/LOC . Everything was going well when one day during one of my excursions I had to grapple with an overzealous commissaire de police who interrogated me and I had a hard time escaping from his clutches . I left this police station and sensed that I was being As it turned out a police officer who had witnessed the scene with the commissaire de police approached me held out his card and asked me to come see him the following day at the Palais de Justice . I went feeling rather uneasy all the same having already been arrested twice . This officer told me that he was on friendly terms with the head of rationing and suggested that we went together to see him so as to take care of all the papers which I needed . No list necessary ! How many do you need a hundred ? You will put the names yourself . And that is how I came to acquire the precious cards by the sheerest of luck . What is more I found out after the war that the head of rationing had also been providing cards to a whole series of people in hiding . … Very often whilst visiting the Jewish families we would be caught in roundups streets blocked off soldiers at every corner with lorries to transfer the product of their hunt . Fortunately nearly every time we managed to save a few children … one in a pram two others by the hand … we would pass through the roadblocks the soldiers making way for a mother with a large family … the children were saved as for the parents ! 1 Committee for the Defence of the Jews . 2 Although the text uses the term ‘ Adoptifeltern adoptive parents when referring to the notaire and his wife it is be more accurate to call them ‘ foster parents especially seeing that they were not technically granted official / legal custody of the child . 3 Note on the usage of ‘ Home versus ‘ home Apart from one instance where it was particularly challenging to avoid using ‘ home in the sense of one general residence the word ‘ Home capitalised has been reserved for the translation of ‘ un home which is explicitly used in the text to refer to a children institution . 4 It is unclear why ‘ Belgian policemen has been used instead of ‘ Belgian policeman seeing that only one is mentioned in the text . 5 Œuvre Nationale de National Organisation for the Children Jeunesse Ouvrière Chrétienne Catholic Labour Youth movement JOC Aide Paysanne aux enfants des villes Rural Help to City Children Foyers Léopold III usually left as ‘ Foyers Léopold III . 6 Note on the usage of ‘ peasant Although ‘ paysan is often translated with a term synonymous to ‘ farmer ‘ peasant has been used because it is a more neutral word that implies anyone who lives in the country and in terms of subsistence relies mainly on the produce of his / her own labour in other words a rural labourer . By contrast a ‘ farmer is usually someone who either owns or manages a farm and cultivates the land which may or may not be the case with a peasant . 7 Possibly a misspelling of des Juifs en Belgique The Association of the Jews in Belgium/GPE AJB . 8 Manaster Flam . Note Throughout the text the French abbreviations for ‘ Monsieur Mr and ‘ Madame Mme have been kept . 9 Possibly referring to the municipality and/or town of Wezembeek/CAMP Oppem/CAMP approximately 10 kilometres east of Brussels/GPEin the province of Flemish/LOC Brabant/LOC . 10 une pensionnat a type of boarding school prevalent throughout France/GPE and other European countries . 11 les ‘ payeuses literally the ‘ payers referring to the girls who regularly went to visit the caretakers in order to bring money and ration stamps . 12 Approximately equivalent to a Headmaster and Headmistress in the UK/GPE . 13 une attestation de résidence a document certifying the child place of residence . 14 Vlaamsch Nationaal Verbond Flemish National League . The text has been left as written i.e. ‘ … avec un commissaire de police VNV due to lack of clarity regarding the relationship between the VNV and the police . 15 Based on context it is suspected that ‘ sans que is a misspelling of ‘ sens que . 
on the boycott day in Berlin/GPE the decision to emigrate and leave everything behind by well to do people the hope of the discontented that the time for revenge was near . Mr and Mrs Beck left their most comfortable flat to their old friend the well known actress Ida Wüst . Her brother a Nazi in uniform who would protest his lasting friendship for them was trusted with the sale of the remaining valuables worth about RM 100 0 as stated in a contract they never received a word or a penny from Mr Wüst after their departure . Although already 65 years of age when he first came to London/GPE Mr Beck worked from 1933 until his death in 1944 indefatigably and successfully in spite of the handicaps which the economic difficulties of those years put in his way again and again . His wife too worked from her arrival in this country and that as a secretary and lady clerk until her health broke down and she retired aged 74 . Emigrants Frau BECK now 80 years old recounts When we were at Eibsee/LOC in Upper/LOC Bavaria/LOC in the winter of 1927 we used to see young people every once in a while with a swastika on their jacket . This displeased one man who was clearly a regular at Eibsee/LOC he placed himself before the entrance of the Schwemme where they usually stopped intercepted the youths one by one and declared Whoever wears such a badge does not come in here ! They simply turned around left the place and are said to have headed towards Badersee/LOC which is situated nearby . On 1 April 1933 Frau Beck had her habitual meeting with her married daughter at a hairdresser in Wittenbergplaz/CAMP in Charlottenburg/LOC . Along the way she saw the smashed in windows of the Kaufhaus des Westens and completely understood when her daughter declared that she wanted to leave the country with her family as soon as possible and on no account wanted to have her child grow up in this poisoned atmosphere . She begged the mother to persuade the father to do the same . Once home she spoke with her husband and found that he had already deliberated the problem thoroughly . He said to her When you have read the book Mein Kampf you know that you can no longer delude yourself . Herr Beck was a very rich man owner of a considerable cardboard factory with 80 employees and accustomed to living in utmost luxury with his family . The decision to leave everything behind and emigrate into the complete unknown could not have been easy for him especially since he was then already 65 years old . It had always been Herr Beck principle to lend an ear to every reasonable request from his employees but when someone had gone on strike once they had to know that under no circumstances would they be hired again . The daughter of the first foreman Liepe by name who had also worked in the factory belonged to a trade union she had taken part in a strike at the end of the 20s and he had remained firm in his refusal to admit her again . Now one day in the middle of April the second foreman declared to Frau Beck that he considered it his duty to let her know that Foreman Liege had said to him The first who will hang on the next tree is old Beck . Frau Beck told her husband nothing of this short but informative discussion since he was already negotiating the sale of the factory . The prospects deteriorated however with increasing rapidity . The buyer who had at first agreed to pay ¼ million RM just for the company goodwill ultimately received it for the current price of the machines and inventory he accepted though the provided conditions 1 that the employees would not be dismissed and 2 that he would pay the price in cash which was crucial under the threatening circumstances . Admittedly the money received then soon went missing in other ways . At that time the Becks were living at Innsbrucker Strasse 14 that is opposite the Café Meran a central meeting place for the Nazis . A giant swastika flag hung on the frontage of the building and constituted an incessantly irritating strain on Frau Beck nerves but when at last the big lifts which were to take her belongings to England/GPE then stood on the street they were not The household staff as well as the people in the factory apart from the one exception also remained loyal to the end . Customs clearance was at the Anhalter Bahnhof . Their numerous suitcases were not searched unopened just marked with chalk . They had left their apartment to an old friend the well known actress Ida Wüst . She wanted to know whether she had to give the apartment back if the Becks did not like life abroad . The reply However we shall be never are we coming back to this country again . Ida Wüst brother who at the time was wearing the SA uniform used to still assure her even then of his sincere friendship . He was an auctioneer and it seemed natural to entrust him with the sale of a number of assets which had to be left behind . He felt certain that he would obtain the best prices . It concerned a valuable Blüthner piano a large car and a yacht together with a sales value of RM . Herr Beck made a contract at his lawyer with Herr Wüst in which he left him the objects for sale with the guarantee of a corresponding commission . He never saw anything of the money and only learnt that the lawyer had left the country in connection with the emigrations . Trying to get something back by way of compensation proved to be unfeasible . In England/GPE Herr Beck visited the companies from which he had obtained the cardboard for his factory . They entrusted him with their representation and from 1933 to 1939 he worked for them with the greatest success and sold their products to wholesalers and factories in Germany/GPE Austria/GPE Czechoslovakia/GPE and Belgium/GPE . The outbreak of the war put an end to this work . Herr Beck now began to build trade relations in Canada/GPE and by doing so soon established a new field of work for himself . Then came the requisition of cardboard by the government in connection with wartime economic measures which no longer left much freedom of movement for a job capable of supporting a by then over 70 year old man . Based on a newspaper advertisement he nevertheless secured work as the representative of a company in the provinces producing lining silk for leather bags and had hardly settled in when the lining of leather bags was forbidden . Herr Beck travelled to the factory in Manchester/GPE and suggested offering the silk in future as coat lining for which its good quality wholly justified its use . He operated sales successfully even on this basis with again entirely new clients and was hindered only by the need to observe the extent to which the material could be made available . Herr Beck died in 1944 . Through all these years his wife had been the secretary bookkeeper and maid of all work in the small companies . Even now 64 years old she still could and would not go into retirement . She obtained an appointment as secretary and bookkeeper in a company where she remained four years . Even later into her 74th year she was working and letting rooms at the same time then ill health forced her to retire . 1 Although the personal pronoun they in the text most logically refers to Frau Beck nerves the overall meaning of the sentence remains slightly unclear . 

tells the story of a young Jewish girl who at the beginning of the war worked secretly for a Jewish furrier in Berlin/GPE until she was denounced arrested and deported to Auschwitz/CAMP . When in 1944 the Russian Army was approaching she and other prisoners were taken away in a goods train . During a halt the girl escaped and with the help of a German soldier and an old woman made her way to Berlin/GPE . After a doctor had removed the Auschwitz/CAMP number with which she had been branded she found employment in a military clothing depot in Stassfurt/CAMP . Escape From a Concentration Camp Transport With the Help of a German Soldier In autumn or winter 1944 I visited old friends – Mr Alfred Nomis his wife and 12 year old daughter he was Jewish his wife was a Christian – at Schivelbeinerstr . 31 Berlin/GPE . He worked as a furrier and after initially being made to do forced labour somewhere he was released and made to do furrier work for the military in his little flat . He had to supply a certain amount of fur waistcoats etc . every day . A young Jewish girl worked for him . When the Jews were being deported in Berlin/GPE she did not return home to her flat at night because she was scared . She stayed somewhere at night and worked at my friend place during the day as she was destitute and needed to earn money . One day despite all warnings she decided to go to the birthday party of a Christian friend who had let her store a few things at her place . Her friend aunty was also at the party . She had nothing better to do than to notify the police . The girl was immediately arrested and deported to Auschwitz/CAMP . That was the last we heard of her . When I visited in 1944 my friends asked if I wanted to see an old acquaintance again . They opened a room that had been locked and in the bed lay the aforementioned girl with her hair cut off . She looked emaciated you could see her bones . Once I reassured her again and again that I would not betray her she told me her story In autumn 1944 prisoners of Auschwitz/CAMP were transported to other camps because the Russians were advancing . She spent two days and a night in a goods wagon with no food . One evening the train stopped at a small station and the poor people were allowed to relieve themselves . This young woman plucked up the courage to go around the small building in the darkness and climb into the brakeman cabin of a freight wagon waiting at the opposite platform of course without knowing where the train was going . Once the train had set off a soldier climbed the steps up to her . He had watched her and asked her what was the meaning of all of this . He told her she was in a train heading for the front but the train would stop at the next station and she would need to vanish there no matter what . After she told him her story he told her he wanted to help . He was born in Switzerland/GPE married a German and took German citizenship for his wife sake so he was forced to go to war . He gave her money and a handkerchief so that she could wash under the nearby fountain . He agreed to meet her in the station bar which was open until 11 . He said he would come and get her there and find her somewhere to stay . Where ? Not even he knew yet . He said she was not to stay on the street under any circumstances – she would be immediately 2 arrested there . She followed all of his orders . The Red Cross were set up in the train station . They gave her hot food and she waited here for her saviour . He needed to slip away without permission . He met her and told her she had to tell everybody she was a refugee on the way to the West . She had lost her baggage and could no longer find the group of refugees she had been with up until this point . He walked with her along the streets of this tiny place and knocked at a small house where a shimmer of light could be seen . An old woman opened the door . The soldier told his made up story again and the old lady took the girl in . She could sleep in a bed for the first time again . At 5 am somebody banged loudly on the front door . The little town had to be evacuated within 2 hours because the front was approaching . All residents had to make their way to the train station . The old lady gave her a coat and she carried the baggage . Both women travelled to Frankfurt/GPE an/LOC der/LOC Oder/LOC where the old lady went to stay with relatives . The young girl bought a ticket to Berlin/GPE and headed to my friends place late in the evening . Once she had started to recover they wondered what to do with her . She could not stay in a Jewish person flat especially as she had her Auschwitz/CAMP identification number emblazoned on her arm . They found a doctor who removed the tattoo . He handed her the piece of skin in a glass filled with alcohol and said Keep it in a safe place you may still need it . Then my friends contacted a good friend who was a Feldwebel sergeant in a military uniform store in Staßfurt/LOC . They told him about the young woman who he used to know . After a few days she travelled to Staßfurt/LOC with a new identity card to work in the uniform store in Staßfurt/LOC until the end of the War when she ran into the arms of the first Americans to arrive . She went to Sweden/GPE to rest then emigrated to America/GPE where she is happily married . I have saved myself the trouble of reporting on her experiences in Auschwitz/CAMP . The things that happened there are well known . I can get her name and address through my friends who now live in Buenos Aires . Mrs Hedwig Peiser née Harms London N.W.6 143 West End/STREET Lane/STREET ./STREET 10/30/1956 See letter to Mrs 1 It is assumed that Berlin/GPE N. refers to a district of Berlin/GPE . 2 The location of this letter is unknown . 
report on organisation and conditions in Theresienstadt/GHETTO by a member of the Jewish Ghetto Guard Willy Goerner . The first ghetto guard was dissolved in June 1943 and most of its members perished in Auschwitz/CAMP . After that only men over ? ? were employed in the ghetto guard . In April 1944 Goerner was transferred to the Aussenarbeitsgruppe Wulkow a working party of over 200 inmates of Theresienstadt/GHETTO who had to construct a future emergency HQ for the Berlin/GPE Gestapo in the woods . Goerner was put in charge of the camp but because of his lenient treatment of the inmates he was replaced by another Jew Rafaelsohn who ill treated the prisoners and was executed in Prague/GPE 1947 . Goerner was sent to a different working party the Z Baustelle which prepared a future HQ for Hitler . The prisoners employed there were guarded by police men from Berlin/GPE who behaved decently . The working groups were sent back to Theresienstadt/GHETTO in February 1945 . Goerner gives instances of sadism existed by Obersturmfuehrer Stuczka but also mentions that SS Oberscharfuehrer Hanke treated the prisoners more decently . Goerner gives also dates of transports from Berlin/GPE to Theresienstadt/GHETTO and from Theresienstadt/GHETTO to Auschwitz/CAMP . Every two to three months about people were sent to Auschwitz/CAMP . He estimates the total between 1941 and 1944 at . 9 . Further References SS Obersturmfuehrer Seidel Burger Rahm and Bergel subsequent commanders of Theresienstadt/GHETTO SS Scharfuehrer Heihdl SS Oberscharfuehrer Czasny and Proschek . Judenaleteste Jakob Edelstein Dr. Eppstein and Dr. Marmelstein Dr Karl Loewenstein police president of Theresienstadt/GHETTO Erich Weichsel chief of training of the Jewish police in Theresienstadt/GHETTO Leo Holzer chief of Jewish Fire Brigade Cursavy Czech superviser of agricultural department in Theresienstadt/GHETTO Translataer compor inmate of Theresienstadt/GHETTO Georg Einstein ditto widow of General von Falkenhaim prominent inmate . Theresienstadt/GHETTO Concentration Camp Ghetto The position of the Camp Theresienstadt/GHETTO which was a fortress until 1882 is situated in the Bohemian area of Leitmeritz/CAMP where the Eger/LOC and Elbe/LOC rivers converge some 50 kilometres north of Prague/GPE . Theresienstadt/GHETTO had around inhabitants until 1941 . The area of the fortress encompasses around square meters . The barracks and living blocks were built in square formations as the plan shows . The old houses of the town are only one floor high in contrast the new houses are two to three floors high . The Czech inhabitants of the town had already been evacuated to the interior of the country on the orders of the German Gestapo in the autumn of 1941 . The moveable inventory in the houses as well as portable ovens and stoves were cleared out at the same time . So only empty rooms remained . Organisation of the Camp The SS Camp Leadership The official rooms of the SS Command were in the street Q 4 /14 and 16 . The living quarters of the Commanders and the other administrative officials were in the street L Mar-24 Names of the Commanders 1941/43 SS Commander Dr Seidel Senior teacher from Vienna/GPE 1943/44 SS Commander Burger Manufacturer from Vienna/GPE 1944/45 SS Commander Rahm Metal worker from Vienna/GPE SS Commander Bergel Permanent representative of the camp commander manufacturer from Vienna/GPE The most well known and most feared other SS member there is SS Lieutenant Heindl a procurer from Vienna/GPE who was well known to some Jewish fellow sufferers from Vienna/GPE . The Jewish Self Administration The Jewish Self Administration comprised a Council of Elders with a Jewish Elder . The heads of the individual branches of the administration belonged to the Council of Elders . The SS Commander at any given time appointed the Jewish Elder . The Jewish Elder could himself choose his closest colleagues and had to present the list of these colleagues to the Commandant for approval . The Jewish Elder held the position like a mayor of a German town with the same departments and appropriate offices . So there were the following in Theresienstadt/GHETTO Central administration with card files Finance administration with a banking institution Commercial office with a central administration for goods Food department with kitchen administration Work department Culture and sports office Health office with corresponding hospital administration Building office Police station with economic criminal and street Police The following Jewish elders held office from 1941 until 1945 1941/43 Jakob Edelstein 1943/44 Dr Eppstein 1944/45 Dr Murmelstein All the departments needed for the administration were based in the Magdeburg/LOC barracks . In the same house more comfortable quarters were made available for the Jewish Elder and for those running the various departments . In the Fortification A IV there was the bakery with eight ovens in which bread for the inmates was baked by inmates . Bread rolls etc . were also baked for the SS in this bakery . Matzah for the Passover Festival was also baked in the bakery under the supervision of Rabbis . But this Matzah was only distributed to those who were strictly observant because there was so little available . The central storage area was also in the Fortification A IV . This is where there were very large supplies of all possible items from the smallest shoe nails nail files paint and coatings brushes and brooms etc . as well as the most expensive medications and surgical items . Even on the day when Theresienstadt/GHETTO was liberated there were still supplies of food etc . for another six months or so . From 1942 the Head of Police was Dr Karl Löwenstein a former lieutenant commander in the German marines . Through his energetic interventions with the Commandants he had been able to implement improvements for those living in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . On 17th May 1942 Dr Löwenstein created a Ghetto Watch as the street police for Theresienstadt/GHETTO . This was based in Barracks L Mar-13 and comprised three Watch Groups totalling 150 police . Jews taken on to the role of Ghetto Watch men were former soldiers and could not be younger than 22 or older than 35 years old . The privilege of being taken on as a member of the Ghetto Watch was given to members of the A. K. Transports . So the Ghetto Watch initially comprised only Czech Jews . The first Ghetto Watch had the privilege of being able to protect their family members in each transport . This privilege was taken away by the Commandants in June 1943 . At first there no uniforms . The police officers wore caps similar to those of the French Army made from black material with a protective flap and a narrow yellow stripe on the upper edges . Above the protective flap were insignia denoting rank on small metal badges with the letters G.W. The Watch Group leaders had two wide yellow vertical stripes fixed above the flaps of the caps whereas the train leaders had just the one stripe . The Corporal leaders wore two narrow yellow stripes and their deputies just the one . Each police officer wore a number on the left side of his suit while performing duties . White linen belts were worn around their waist over their civilian jackets while train and group leaders also wore white straps . With the exception of the ranked officers every G.W. man carried a wooden truncheon whereas the German Police carried rubber truncheons . In addition to the regular squad of 350 men young and inexperienced Jews aged between 21 and 30 were trained in courses lasting eight weeks to become additional police reserves . The person who ran these courses was the Austrian General Staff Captain Reich Weichsel who was assisted by former non commissioned officer Schüler and Sergeant Willy Görner as instructors . In May 1943 the G.W. was supplied with a grey uniform manufactured from dyed linen material . On 17 May 1943 the first anniversary of G.W. time was ceremoniously marked in the area of the Dresden Barrack . The formal swearing in of the G.W. men and of the reservists took place at am . This was followed by a march past by the G.W. in group formation in front of the Council of Elders . Those watching were unguarded Czechs some SS men in civilian clothes and a large number of inmates . The subsequent march past of the G.W. in goose step had left such an impression that the uniforms had to be handed over as early as the afternoon of 17th May 1943 . The order by the SS Commanders to dissolve the G.W. with immediate effect was given on 1 June 1943 and a new G.W. comprising only men over 45 years old was put into place . Those who were higher ranked remained with the Police . In the late summer of 1943 those G.W. men whose services were dispensed with were deported to Auschwitz/CAMP together with their relatives . The Council of Elders stated that these men would be Watch men again in Auschwitz/CAMP . I do not know that more than eight persons of the first G.W. survived . Even the second rate G.W. men were all taken to Auschwitz/CAMP in the autumn of 1944 because they were involved in smuggling with outside groups and illegal exchange of letters which had involved the Czechs and the outside groups . Some of the Czechs who were involved were punished and transferred to the small fortress . The police had the task of keeping order in the streets and above all in ensuring that there was no paper in the streets and that the prisoners did not spit onto the ground . The illegal task meant one had to be really careful when the S.S. came into the town and to report this immediately to the O.D. security staff and inform the house and the room Elder . The police dealing with criminal and business matters was under Dr Löwenstein as well . The crime police had the same tasks to perform as the Berlin/GPE crime police . The business police carried out checks in the kitchen and the business camps . The security staff called O.D i.e. Ordnungsdienst was part of the police . It was under the central administration . Only men above 45 were used as security staff as they would have to do light work . These men had to ensure that peace and order were maintained in the living blocks and the barracks . When working at night they had to check that only those who could show written proof of permission to go to work could leave their accommodation . There was a large hospital in the High Elbe Hohenelbe Barracks equipped with a modern operating room . The lives of many prisoners were saved here by the most capable of Jewish doctors . Beyond this in these barracks was a large shower room with baths which could be used by the prisoners . In the Gnie Barracks there was a TB hospital and areas for the special treatment of eye ear etc . illnesses . The very best doctors were to be found working here . In Fortification H.II there was a construction yard . Car repairs were carried out here . A special carpentry department had to produce the finest items of furniture for the commandants . Toy and ink production was also based in H.II both intended for German customers . The proceeds of this work were credited to the procuring funds of the commandants . In L May-21 and 24 the former riding stables was the big machine carpentry department which constructed parts of barracks for the German army as ordered by the SS Command . In the autumn of 1943 a big machine was also introduced for the manufacture of clogs and shoes for the prisoners . The Sudeten Barracks housed around prisoners until the summer of 1943 . The barracks were cleared out and then the entire European personnel file indexes were placed here . Only German police officials under the supervision of the SS worked here . These file indexes were burned by the fire brigade in the first half of April 1945 on the orders of the SS and under the supervision of the SS and the Czechs in work that took days and nights to complete . The Aussiger Barracks was the depository for clothes . Prisoners in each incoming transport were registered in these barracks and liberated from their most valuable possessions in terms of clothes etc . Every now and then these items were particularly sought and taken to Germany/GPE by the truckload . The Bodenbach Barracks with its armoury was the home for Jews until the autumn of 1943 . After it was emptied the officials who had worked in the Sudeten Barracks were accommodated there . Block D II – Kasino/LOC – was where the Czech police force was quartered . The police officers were called ‘ Tschetniks for short . They were brought in to guard Theresienstadt/GHETTO and they were stationed at posts by the exits of the fortress and by the ramparts . The Czech Jews would talk and exchange news in a lively way sometimes with old acquaintances and at other times with other trustworthy Czechs . Cigarettes as well as other tobacco goods and also money were brought to Theresienstadt/GHETTO through these contacts . The Tschechniks brought in large amounts of money for Jews that they had befriended . Their commission was anything up to 50 % of the money they brought in . But overall the Tschechniks behaved decently towards the Jews . There were some amongst them who were guilty of violently hitting prisoners . Of particular note in this connection was Janischeck the Commandant of the Tschechniks . In recognition of his poor treatment of both prisoners and also his own police officers he was awarded the epaulettes of a German captain . The Tschechniks also had the task of leading and looking after those work groups who were deployed outside Theresienstadt/GHETTO . The fire brigade was accommodated in L 5-Feb . Its leader was the Jewish fire engineer Leo Holzer from Vienna/GPE . The fire brigade consisted of three groups keeping watch comprising 50 men who were initially trained by Holzer . A fire engine of the oldest type with a motorised spray and a lot of hoses and a mechanical ladder was the extent of the technical equipment . The entire crew of the fire brigade was deported to Auschwitz/CAMP in March 1944 . The leader Leo Holzer was removed from the group of deportees because the SS Command did want to be left without a single fireman . None of those deported came back . The frequent fires in the ash bunkers and chimneys meant that the fire brigade had enough calls into action . There were also bigger fires . In February 1945 a shoe making barracks in the area of the Southern barracks went up in flames . As a result Leo Holzer was struck so hard by an SS officer that two of his back teeth were knocked out because in the opinion of the officer the fire brigade had not showed up quick enough at the scene . In March 1945 an area of approximately 600 square metres burned where a roof of the Hamburger Barracks was being constructed . In this instance the professional Bauschowitz/CAMP fire brigade had offered to come but were not required . The speedy and courageous fight against this large fire had resulted in the praiseworthy recognition of Superior Officer Rahm in the form of a small container of liver sausage and 100 grammes of margarine . The fire brigade fought their last big fire at am on 9 May 1945 . In the Southern barracks the area for uniform materials had gone up in flames . It was around midday when the superior officer came to the site of the fire tapped Leo Holzer in a jovial way on his shoulder saying Well Holzer we wo be reconstructing these barracks anymore . Rahm lingered for a short while at the site of the fire and then returned to the Commandants area . It was later that said by a Tschetnik that the fire was started by Squad Leader Heindl . A large number of the camp prisoners were alerted to the fire by the noise of the fire brigade and in curiosity they came to the southern gate to watch the work of the fire being extinguished . At this time the rest of the SS occupation force left the town to go in a north western direction . It was during the previous night from 8 to 9 May 1945 that the bulk of the SS occupation force had moved out so the Tschechniks had told us . The agricultural team were based in D I and they managed several hundred acres of land together with a haulage area and a lot of agricultural equipment . In addition there was the entire livestock that had come from the area of Lidice/LOC taken by the SS . The leader of the agriculture section was the Czech Cursavy a member of the Nazi Party . There were only a few occasions when Cursavy hit his Jewish workers and only then when the controlling SS made him do this . Blocks E Iva and E IVb were intended for the accommodation of children . Only Czech children were in E IVb . There was another children home in L Apr-19 . The church that was situated between these two blocks stayed closed the whole time . In the corner house L 4-Sep Apr-15 there was a shop for ladies and gents ready made clothes . With their coupons the inmates could acquire clothing which they now needed but only after receiving the prior permission of the business office . The stocks were replenished by the items left by prisoners who had died or had been deported . On the plot of land there was a coffee house in the Viennese style . Every visitor received a cup of coffee no coffee beans and a lump of sugar for the payment of two Ghetto Kronen . The famous composer Translatär played the piano in the coffee house until he starved to death . In the autumn of 1943 and the spring of 1944 the market place of the small town was completely dug up and converted into a lawn area complete with large borders of flowers . There were even benches placed on the edges of the square . A music pavilion was built in the corner L4 / Q4 opposite the coffee house as the high point of the publicity for those from the outside . A band played here every lunch time and evening . The pieces of music to be played were prescribed by the SS command . Concerts and plays were performed in the Sokolowna formerly the Sokol Club house situated on the street which runs south west between and Sudeten barracks . There was also a small theatre area built by the inmates on the floor of the Magdeburger barracks . Concerts and plays were performed by the many artists Jewish artists who found themselves in Theresienstadt/GHETTO but only after receiving permission from the SS command . In L Apr-16 and 18 there was a watch repair workshop and a shop for spectacles . The watch repair workshop mainly carried out tasks for the SS Command . Only the heads of the main administration and the police received repair permission documents through the business office in the case of spectacles receipts were handed out and repairs were carried out with the express permission of the business office . The butcher shop was in area L Apr-13 . This supplied horse meat for the big kitchens . In general this butcher shop situated on the street was empty . It was only on the days when commissions arrived in Theresienstadt/GHETTO for the purposes of inspecting that good meat and sausage products were displayed . A grocery shop was established in the house on L 4-Nov . Here one could buy a great choice of herbal teas mustard and tomato puree with a coupon and in exchange for Ghetto Kronen . This occurred on average at 3 monthly intervals for the inmates . Mustard and tomato puree were very popular as spreads for bread . The bank which supplied the Ghetto money had its rooms on the ground floor of Q Apr-14 . Altogether around 5 million Ghetto Kronen notes were printed made up of 1 2 5 10 20 50 and 100 Kronen notes . This money was handed out as payment for work undertaken and was the official currency of Theresienstadt/GHETTO . The possession of other forms of money was forbidden . The laundry was sited on the street which leads via square C to the small fortress . This central laundry had been set up by the Jews and was operating in three shifts . Each prisoner received on average one washing permission document every three months which allowed him / her to use the facilities to wash 3 kgs of clothes . The columbarium was on the left side of the L2 street which runs through the map squares II and III . The columbarium was the place where the deceased were remembered and where their ashes were stored . On the other side of the street opposite the columbarium was the mortuary with its small space where funeral ceremonies could take place in all solemnity . The deceased were placed in simple boxes comprising lengths of bare wood and carried in the chapel . Following a short funeral ceremony the boxes containing the deceased were loaded onto a carriage pulled by two horses to be driven to the crematorium . Those who were left behind were allowed to follow the carriage as far as the exit of the fortress . In the months September to October 1944 many thousands of urns cardboard cartons containing the ashes of those who had died up to that date were transported to the Eger/LOC on the orders of the Command and under the supervision of the SS and then shaken into the river . Even children under 14 were called upon to do this work . The homes for the sick and infirm were in the block D VI and F III . All the very sick prisoners who were not expected to live were housed here . Many of the extremely sick prisoners owe their lives to skills of the predominantly Jewish doctors present in Theresienstadt/GHETTO if they were not to eventually die in Auschwitz/CAMP . The Small Fortress The small fortress was a precursor to the fortress of Theresienstadt/GHETTO and was situated one kilometre north east of Theresienstadt/GHETTO . Jews who had been severely punished in Theresienstadt/GHETTO by the SS Command were brought here . Czechs and Tschetniks as well as Germans who were guilty of collaborating with the Jews were likewise brought here . The small fortress was the nearest extermination camp to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . Only a small number of prisoners were able to survive this hell . Those prisoners who were guilty of further punishable offences were selected for shooting practice on the shooting range . These living people were used as targets for shooting on the shooting range . As Hans Wagner a fellow sufferer in the small fortress told me the commandant ‘ Pinja and his daughter had taken part in these shootings with great pleasure – and even his daughter had distinguished herself in this . The Wulkow Outside Work Group In the first days of March 1944 a work group comprising 235 men were sent to Wulkow/LOC in the region of Trebnitz/LOC some 55 kms from Berlin/GPE in order to build barracks . The work group were mainly volunteers . These men were promised by the SS Headquarters that they and their families would be exempt from any transportation . This promise was kept . The Jewish lead worker was the Czech engineer Cosinier and he had with him other engineers Schindler Eckstein Wassermann Mukden and others . The SS leadership and supervising officers were SS Senior Sergeant Franz Stuczka clothing manufacturer from Vienna/GPE SS Senior Sergeant Czasny cab driver from Vienna/GPE SS Senior Sergeant Hanke bricklayer foreman from Vienna/GPE SS Senior Sergeant Proschek bank messenger from Vienna/GPE In addition there was an SS Guards Group comprising ten SS men with Lance Corporal Schmidt as commander . The specialist work force had a roofer a well digger and experts in electricity telephone plumbing and painting . These men were not on the building site the whole day but their role was to give instructions regarding the individual tasks . These specialists were all German . In the summer of 1944 the 235 men were joined by 25 women from Theresienstadt/GHETTO whose job it was to keep the barracks in a good state of order as well as to clean the clothes of the men . The work force was involved with 110 building projects in the woods on Wulkow/LOC . These comprised building living barracks work and kitchen barracks as well as bunkers for files pools of water for extinguishing fires vehicle workshops and a bunker for coal . Complete systems for sewage and wells with modern automatic pumps were created for this small town of barracks . This camp was the alternative place for the headquarters of the Berlin/GPE Gestapo and was partly adopted for this purpose in the autumn of 1944 and was carefully watched over by a group of SS guards . In the first days of August 1944 a new building site was started at a distance of around 2 kms from the main camp . This building site was named the Z building site . This was built as the private chancellery of the Führer . It consisted of living working and kitchen barracks a bunker for files was part of this as was a pool of water for extinguishing fires a vehicle workshop and a shed for coal . The construction of a bunker for receiving news made entirely from concrete was also started . A modern system including piping intended for extracting water was likewise part of this . The hours of work for the work groups were am to pm in the summer months and am to dusk in the winter months . There was a one hour midday break . Every second Sunday was given as a work free day . In this connection Stuczka had thought of special forms of amusement at least for the mornings . He then often played a game of so called ‘ Häufchenmachen ‘ piling up . All members of the work group had to come for a roll call and then for reasons that were impossible to establish Stuczka would select the most varied persons and make them come together in small piles . And then the group leaders were asked by the senior lieutenant about their diligence mental attitude etc . Sometimes Stuczka left having issued an order that no one was to leave their place . After one or two hours he either returned to continue the game or broke it up . A particular sport of Stuczka on the free Sundays was for the men to carry tree trunks from one place in the camp to another . For the women ‘ dragging stones was the order of the day . On one day in October Stuczka managed a quite special orgy . In the previous days there had been a lot of rain which had very much softened up the ground and created a large puddle in front of the living barracks . Stuczka summoned a roll call on this Sunday . He selected his special favourites from amongst the women and ordered them to sit down on the ground and to use their behinds to push the resulting mud to a place indicated by him . So the women had to lift up their clothes high so that they were in effect clothed only in their knickers . In similar fashion the men had to remove their upper clothes leaving just their shirts and stand by to watch the women . The two women by the name of Schlesinger and Thomas had to bathe in the puddle firstly immersing the front sides of their bodies fully into the puddle and then the back sides . Then Stuczka trod on their upper bodies then their lower bodies so that they were then completely covered in mud . And each time these procedures were accompanied by Stuczka laughing in a devilish way . After five hours this roll call ended and this Sunday had been ruined . Stuczka was very unpopular amongst his subordinates . He was also extraordinarily untrusting . With even the slightest suspicion of a perhaps unintended instance of untruthfulness on the part of the workmen he would react immediately with the cruellest methods of beating . The SS squad leaders were likewise no angels . I can however maintain that they were very restrained in the matter of beating the work men . Senior SS squad leader Hanke very often even acted in contradiction to the orders of the Senior Assault Leader by caring well for those workers who had been beaten by Stuczka and placed in close detention . The Z building site work groups were led and watched by four SS men in the first week . On 1 October 1944 the supervision of this work group and the guarding of the building site were taken over by a group of police from Berlin/GPE comprising twelve policemen with a main guarding officer even during the nights . The Z work group lived in the greatest harmony with this group of police . Theresienstadt/GHETTO cared for the food requirements of the work group . Every fourteen days a carriage of food would come from Theresienstadt/GHETTO . The rations were 10 % more than in Theresienstadt/GHETTO itself . These comparatively good rations were very frequently significantly reduced by the senior squad leader for some or other reasons that were not transparent and were often completely non existent . Then it was the young pods of the acacia trees that made up the meagre nourishment for the work men . In the first week a camp guard group comprising six men was formed from the workers under the supervision of Georg Einstein grandson of Professor Dr Einstein . On 26 April 1944 a guard group of the Ghetto Watch comprising six men and under the orders of Guard Commandant Willy Görner was ordered to go to Wulkow/CAMP . Görner then assumed control of the camp as Chief of Police but then had this role removed from him due to his laxness towards his fellow sufferers and he took over supervision of the new Z building works . The leadership role in terms of the entire camp was then handed over to fellow sufferer Rafaelsohn . In the time prior to this change of leadership the Senior Assault Leader Obersturmführer had conducted himself in a relatively normal way but thereafter began to use the most terrible methods of beating and Rafaelsohn often supported him with this . As a result Rafaelsohn was sentenced to death and hanged in 1947 in Prague/GPE . In the night of 2 3 February 1945 the working group marched to Trebnitz/CAMP and were then loaded into four cattle trucks and their journey to Theresienstadt/GHETTO ended around p.m. on 10 February 1945 having passed through Berlin/GPE Luckenwalde/LOC Jüterbog/LOC Halle/LOC Merseburg/LOC Würzburg/LOC and Prague/GPE . III . The Prisoners of the Ghetto . Jews in Theresienstadt/GHETTO had to wear a Star of David which had been made a legal requirement from 19 September 1941 . The residents of Theresienstadt/GHETTO had not all yet been evacuated when the first transports arrived in the late summer of 1941 . At first it was just Jews from Czechoslovakia/GPE . These transports had the designation A.K.I II etc . Construction Commando . The transport of Jews from Berlin/GPE was designated I / B 90 10990 . So this was the 90th transport from Berlin/GPE with the 10990th Jew from Berlin/GPE . The transports from the other German towns had other Roman first digits . The Jews transported to Theresienstadt/GHETTO from all the countries that had been occupied by the Germans had met certain conditions . These conditions were Married couple had to have a combined age of 130 . War wounded from 1914 1918 who had been at the front for a certain time . Those who had fought in the war who had the various insignia the least being the EK II given to the wounded . Those awarded the EK I who had fought at the front in the war for a certain time . Those who were married whose spouse had to be Aryan and who have children brought up as Christians . Jews who had been in the service of the Gestapo for a considerable time or who had demonstrated special merit . In this context the individual Jewish communities were given the task of encouraging their members to purchase enough to last their lifetimes for their stays in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . They had to pay a large amount of money to the Gestapo for this . These Jews were then transported to Theresienstadt/GHETTO but then had no advantages over the others . There were even prominent Jews amongst the others in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . These were high government officials and high officers and scientists from the occupied countries . They were particularly sought by the notorious SS Senior Assault Leader SS Obersturmführer Eichmann . One of the most prominent personalities was the widow of the General von Falkenhain . The AK Transportees had to construct the empty structures in the barracks from untreated and un planed boards . They made beds which were 180 cm long and 60 cm wide and were triple bunk beds . The beds were supplied with paper bags that were filled with wood wool . The prisoners had to bring their own sheets etc . There were no tables chairs or cupboards there at all . General Matters There were approximately 14 large kitchens that supplied food for the prisoners on a community wide basis . The food served would alternate between millet gruel and turnip or potato meals . The order of the days was Mornings coffee but of course not ground coffee Midday Extract of Lentil Soup with a potato dish . Evening Coffee or Extract of Lentil Soup Lunch comprised 250 gr . raw weight potatoes millet gruel etc . 100 gr standard sauce ¼ litre soup With this meal there was also 750 gr . bread to last 3 days in addition to last for 10 days 90 gr . sugar and 50 gr . margarine Every second day there was also ‘ 50 gr . meat raw weight for lunch . Those who had to undertake heavy labour received 900 gr . bread and 50 % extra in terms of the standard lunch ration . Children received 50 gr . more food for lunch than the adults and their food came from special kitchens . Instead of coffee in the evenings they received comparatively well cooked semolina soup etc . Some of the prisoners received parcels from their relatives and friends . Parcels weighing 250 gr . to 25 kilos were permitted . Before being handed to the recipients the contents of these parcels were checked by the Tschekniks together with the SS Command . The recipients then received confirmation cards which each contained additional five hand written words . All men and women under 65 who were capable of working were registered in the work offices and divided up into the most different branches of work . Anyone over 65 did not need to work . There were special barracks in which only men lived and also some in which women with children lived . Married couples over 65 could live together in special living quarters but not together in one room . There was always plenty of different kinds of work to do in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . There was the inner construction of the sleeping quarters the creation of a good system of piping making provision for a supply of fresh water for the Ghetto from outside Theresienstadt/GHETTO construction and upgrading of the streets around Theresienstadt/GHETTO and the construction of the tram line from Bauschowitz/CAMP to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . All these projects involved the labour of many thousands of prisoners . It is worth mentioning at this point the large work group called ‘ Kameik which built a large shooting range in the mountains of Leitmeritz/LOC for the army . Those prisoners who worked outside Theresienstadt/GHETTO had the big advantage of better portions of food . In addition they had the possibility of coming into contact with the population . This meant that these workers had been able to smuggle fruit vegetables tobacco items and other goods that were unknown delicacies and this smuggling was often quietly tolerated by the Tschetniks . These goods were then partly exchanged for others with their friends or relatives and partly sold to them or simply given . With this smuggling it often happened that everything went smoothly as far as the entrance to the camp but then the SS appeared and undertook a close inspection . Anyone caught would have had to expect a lengthy spell in prison . In particularly serious cases they were ordered to be taken into the small fortress . In the South Barracks which were outside Theresienstadt/GHETTO a large industry was started . Here was a big building for making Mica splitters and a workshop for shoes and clothes . The prisoners worked in these barracks in three shifts . After their work and other matters were done the prisoners could go to their overnight accommodation . Finishing time was pm in the summer and pm in the winter . Warnings were sounded in Theresienstadt/GHETTO whenever Allied planes approached . The occupants of their accommodation stayed where they were . The police then had to undertake special patrols to check that the black out regulations were being observed . In the living quarters and in the barracks were hairdressing rooms and sick bays for the outpatient treatment of those who were not seriously ill . There were shower rooms in the Hohenelbe/LOC barracks and in Block D VI . There used to be spacious brewery in D VI . The shower rooms generally enjoyed great popularity yet permission passes to use these shower rooms could only be given by the Block Elder . Theresienstadt/LOC was the show camp of the Gestapo . Almost at 3 month intervals Theresienstadt/GHETTO was visited by international commissions accompanied by high ranking SS Gestapo and army officers . The prisoners were not allowed to speak with the members of these commissions . These commissions were always a bad portent of coming events for the prisoners . Consistently large deportations to Auschwitz/CAMP Birkenau/CAMP followed a few days after such visits . In addition every two or three months large transportations to Auschwitz/CAMP regularly took place and these would decimate the camp by people on average each time . In the winter half year of 1943 44 the most people ever lived in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . At this time there were around people in this small town . The number of daily deaths rose to 350 400 at this time . The bodies to brought into the mortuary and after a brief ceremony were taken into the crematorium nearby . In the autumn months of 1944 there were larger deportations to Auschwitz/CAMP . On 25 April 1944 when I left Theresienstadt/GHETTO there were around people there . When I returned at the beginning of February 1945 there were barely still present there . In effect it seemed that Theresienstadt/GHETTO had almost died out . Between 1941 and 1944 around people had been funnelled through Theresienstadt/GHETTO to Auschwitz/CAMP . In the first days of April 1945 a convoys of 20 cars bearing the national emblem of Denmark/GPE appeared . The few Jews of Danish nationality were taken out of Theresienstadt/GHETTO in these cars . As these people were loaded into these cars there were some comical scenes . The accompanying staff gave cigarettes to the prisoners who were looking on with interest . Senior Storm Leader Obersturmführer Rahm and Squad Leader Scharführer Heindl who happened to be present wanted to stop the Danes giving these out but could not prevent this as the Danes were steadfast . Rahm even tried to climb into one of these cars but was prevented from doing so by the accompanying staff in a polite but energetic manner he was told that such entry into Danish territory was forbidden to him . In that period of time it was also revealing that neither Heindl nor Rahm put right or struck any of the smoking Jews . Smoking was banned in Theresienstadt/GHETTO with the threat of the most severe sanctions for anyone who was caught . The convoy of cars left Theresienstadt/GHETTO amidst the cheering of the prisoners who remained behind and it did in fact reach the intended destination in Denmark/GPE despite the ongoing and unresolved war negotiations that were taking place . There were spaces constructed for religious services in the attics of the Hamburger and Genie barracks as well as in corresponding spaces in the C IV sleeping quarters and these were used by practising Christians and Jews on an alternate basis . In Theresienstadt/GHETTO there were not only those of Jewish faith but also baptised Jews of the Christian faith . It was through this that for example in the fire brigade I got to know and value a man called Tabaksblatt . He had been an evangelical missionary in Holland/GPE and his father was a senior rabbi in Lodz/GHETTO . I also came to know a ‘ designated Jew ‘ Geltungsjude in Theresienstadt/GHETTO who had been an evangelical priest in a German town . On 11th November 1943 a count of all the people was made in the/LOC ‘/LOC Bauschowitzer/LOC Basin/LOC a valley between Theresienstadt/GHETTO and Bauschowitz/LOC . Only those who were confined to bed were allowed to stay in the town . From 6 in the morning the entire population of Theresienstadt/GHETTO – in groups arranged according to their accommodation blocks – moved to the roll call area . They marched there until around midday . The entire area was blocked off by order of the Tschetniks . The SS members now let off steam by hitting the prisoners . Old people and children were not spared . There was no chance of answering calls of nature . At around Senior Storm Leader Obersturmführer Burger the camp leader decided to allow the prisoners back into Theresienstadt/GHETTO . But now sad events played out . Old people who could no longer walk called to passers by to support them and children who had become lost called for their mothers . In addition people found themselves mixed up with others with everyone looking to find their own which was hardly possible in the darkness . It was long past midnight when the inmates managed to regain their sense of peace . Seeing the packed mass of people in this small space on the road from Theresienstadt/GHETTO to Bauschowitz/CAMP the passing Czech population had gained the impression that the Jews would be annihilated here through bombs dropped by planes . This view was also stated on 12 November 1943 in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . This was confirmed to us in reports by outside work groups and members of police patrols who has picked up on the very strong movement of bicycles pedestrians and cars on the road from Theresienstadt/GHETTO to Bauschowitz/CAMP . The sport and culture office had the nice task of offering a diversion for the prisoners . And so football and other ball sport competitions were organised on the bastion . The bastion was a large area of lawn between the fortification walls behind the Jäger barracks . Opera and operetta events and concerts gave the many Jewish artists a wholesome nourishment and the prisoners a beneficial diversion for a few hours …… from the thoughts that were constantly circling inside their heads about the Sword of Damocles of further deportations . These events even sometimes silenced the stomachs that were grumbling in hunger for a few hours . In March 1945 the children operetta ‘ Brautschky ‘ Little Glow Worm was performed but this only involved the Czech children of prisoners who were three years or older . One of the main performers was a girl of barely four years of age . This operetta enthused both old and young and was performed around eight times . The members of the SS Command were present at one of the last performances . In their inner excitement these gentlemen did not smoke cigarettes during the entire performance but they puffed at them instead . I was on fire brigade duty in Sokolowna/LOC and so I could see at close hand the constantly changing expressions on the faces of these criminals and the way they were racked by their consciences . When they were looking at these charming little children they probably must have been recalling how many such children had been deported to their deaths in Auschwitz/CAMP . Apart from the constant hunger and the uncertainly about the imminent deportations to Auschwitz/CAMP the prisoners were also tormented by huge plagues of bugs and fleas . These tiny creatures were present in unimaginable numbers and could not be eradicated by the constant fumigations of the living quarters . Marriages were not possible in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . For example whenever two person became attached to each other they could have the words ‘ life companion written into their central ID cards as an appropriate term . If they so wished a ritual wedding would take place but one without any legal validity . Any consequential actions within the community of ‘ life companions and also in interactions with legally married people were not allowed to be made apparent . Otherwise this would definitely result in deportations to Auschwitz/CAMP . In July 1944 the film ‘ Theresienstadt/GHETTO was made . The only prisoners to be filmed were those who had a certain Jewish appearance . The Jewish Elder was also to drive around in the town and he received a cigar which was taken from him once the filming was over . In January 1945 the Command put together a transport of around 1000 people destined for Switzerland/GPE . Volunteers were also allowed to join this transport . Those taking part were dressed and equipped in their finest . The transport left Theresienstadt/GHETTO and arrived in Switzerland/GPE in modern train carriages . From the end of March 1945 transports of Jewish prisoners arrived almost daily from other camps which had to be emptied as the Russian Army in the east was approaching . Some of these transports arrived in Theresienstadt/GHETTO on foot others in cattle trucks . These poor people were completely exhausted and for the most part were accommodated in the hospitals . Those Jewish prisoners who had arrived in the trucks had to be literally unloaded as if they were freight . These people found that they had become unbelievably weakened . These returnees brought us the first news of the hitherto unknown conditions inside the Auschwitz/CAMP extermination camp . Dr Schnurmacher Dr Winternitz Heinrich Jokel and Leo Kaufmann my comrades in the first Ghetto Watch all of whom were amongst the returnees provided me with detailed and thorough descriptions of Auschwitz/CAMP . I can clearly offer one example of the decimation of the Jewish people and I take it from a specific transport to Theresienstadt/GHETTO from Berlin/GPE . This was Transport I/90 which was brought to Theresienstadt/GHETTO on 17 March 1943 . This transport arrived with 1350 people in Theresienstadt/GHETTO on 18 March 1943 . 49 of these people were still alive on 15 May 1945 . In the days between 22 and 26 April 1945 a Commission of the Swiss Red Cross appeared in Theresienstadt/GHETTO in six cars . After briefly consulting with the SS Command they declared the entire camp and the small fortress to be international territory . A Red Cross flag was raised on the church tower . The inmates of Theresienstadt/GHETTO were very excited yet peace was maintained . After the Commission had arrived the destruction of the records began . The fire brigade had to work for many days in day shifts and night shifts under the supervision of the SS and the police force . The liberation of the prisoners of Theresienstadt/GHETTO by Russian forces followed on 9 May 1945 at around pm . A Russian major with his staff took over the leadership . Official closing time was set for pm . Infringements did not occur . After a quarantine period lasting three weeks the prisoners were officially discharged with repatriation ID documents . On 10 June 1945 I left Theresienstadt/GHETTO with my family and our friends Ernst Werner and his mother as well as Erwin Diettrich . We travelled by train from Bauschowitz/CAMP to Dresden/LOC . From there we walked to Berlin/GPE where we arrived in Berlin/GPE Marienfelde/LOC on 26 June 1945 . 
record of an interview with a gypsy from Burgenland/CAMP . The report illustrates the similarity between the treatment of Jews and that of gypsies . Racial persecution of the gypsies of the Burgenland/CAMP started soon after the annexation of Austria/GPE . To escape persecution Mr Hodosi like many others volunteered for army service but was expelled because of his race in spite of Goering consent to an exception being made in his case . He and his wife were arrested by the Gestapo in 1941 and brought to the Lackenbach/CAMP camp in the Burgenland/CAMP . They escaped but after a period of illegal life he was arrested again and together with his wife and 2 children brought to Auschwitz/CAMP Birkenau/CAMP ./CAMP His description of conditions there corresponds with the many Jewish accounts of the subject . His children were starved to death . He states that in 1944 particularly dark skinned gypsies were selected for experiments on human beings at Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP . Towards the end of the year a number of young men and women volunteered for sterilization experiments however the promise that they would be released afterwards was not kept . Mr Hodosi was allocated to the so called Bewährungstruppe Probationary Unit which was forced to fight against the Russians in the Kottbus/LOC sector and suffered extremely high losses . Most of those who were not killed in action were murdered by the SS . Mr Hodosi himself was lucky enough to be made a prisoner of war by the Russians . 8 . Further References Schreiner Gestapo official Vienna/GPE . .... Jews and Gypsies What is written down here was experienced by Mr Julius Hodosi now living in Vienna/GPE IX . It was the hardest time of my life . It hard for me to remember I would like to forget … My home is in Burgenland/CAMP where the majority of the Austrian Gypsies lived . After the annexation of Austria/GPE we heard different things about the Nazis racial persecution . A lot of people believed they could escape this fate by registering voluntarily for the German army . Me too . The captain of my air force unit liked me . When the order came to expel all Gypsies from the army he wrote to Goering . He got the response that I could stay if the captain thinks it justifiable . But for the local group of my hometown it was shameful to have a Gypsy in the army . They complained about it so the captain wrote to Hitler . Hitler answered briefly When it the local NSDAP group wish you have to expel him . So I took off the uniform and went back to my hometown . One night the came into the village . They came with trucks and randomly loaded entire families . That why almost all the Gypsies hastily left the village . I moved to Gisshübel/LOC near Vienna/GPE and lived there in a subtenancy . My little brother who still went to school was expelled . A Gypsy was an adequate member of society . In 1941 my wife and I were arrested by the in Gisshübel/LOC . We went to the Lackenbach/CAMP reception camp in Burgenland/LOC . In this camp we got a foretaste of what was in store for us . The SS beat us . The food was horrible . I did the only thing possible and tried to flee . In fact my wife and I were able to escape . Together we hid in Vienna/GPE and lived as so called submarine boats . We were not registered and did get food cards . Because we had no money I had to look for a job . That was very dangerous but I had no choice . A coal trader was happy to get me as a delivery man because it was difficult to get male employees at this time . But it happened as I had foreseen . My cover was blown and I was arrested by the Gestapo again . Three weeks I was in Rossauerlände/LOC prison . During a hearing the Gestapo official Schreiner said literally We will destroy you like cats ! At home I had a wife and two little children . Two girls aged one and two years . I did know if I would see them again . But when I was on the transport to Ausschwitz/CAMP the Gestapo brought my wife and the children to the station too . Together we rode to the Birkenau/CAMP extermination camp . The transport was an agony . Penned up without food without water without light we rode into the unknown . Finally when the waggons opened the SS received us with blows and bloodhounds we were at our destination . In this moment we stopped being humans . We were just numbers . All that we had was taken from us . All of us the women and children too had our heads shaved . All of us my little girls too were tattooed with a number . – Then we came into the so called entrance barrack . We were in this barack about one week until we were called to different commandos On the 5th day we saw that there are more terrible things than getting almost nothing to eat . 300 people from Burgenland/CAMP were selected for the gasification and immediately gassed . The SS visibly revelled in the agony of the people . I came with my wife to the commando earthworks . Amongst other places we laid rails to the crematories . Every day from 9 – 10 there was the so called punishment work . In this hour we had to do work on the double . When someone fell down with a heavy barrow or tippler they battered him to death immediately . So we lost 50 – 60 people daily . In the morning the SS whispered to the the number of people who should not come back anymore . And the Capo tried to fulfill this order . For all children the camp was certain death . There was no nourishing food no milk nothing a child needs for the development of the body . In addition to that the uncertain life . No minute were you safe . We had to muster in the night for hours little children too – which made hounded tortured beings of us . Very often the drunken SS made fun of us . They lined us up and selected those who had to go to the gas . Sometimes it was TRUE sometimes not . During this time I lost my two young children . They literally died of hunger . The food was the following 5 people got daily 1 army bread . Every prisoner got also 1 spoon marmalade ½ kg swede and sometimes 50 grammes of ham and 20 grammes of margarine . There were extra portions too but always for a special purpose . The result of the distribution led very often to affrays . There were always people killed . The hunger was big . In addition to that came epidemics of typhus malaria mange etc . The sick people were gassed . So they reduced our number from to within one year . 1944 in Birkenau/CAMP and as I heard in Lackenbach/CAMP Burgenland/CAMP too they selected especially dark skinned Gypsies men and women for transports to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP . They did experiments with them to find out how long a man can survive without food and drink . At the end of this year they organised further transports . They seperated people who were fit for the military and such young women and men who agreed to be part of sterilisation experiments in the hope of freedom . They were promised release from the camp but the truth was very different . 8 days after such an operation which was done without anaesthetic they had to go back to work . Many perished because of that . I became part of the so called Bewährungstruppe and was installed at the front near Cottbus/LOC on 12th April 1945 . Those who did die during the fighting were killed by the SS from behind . From men just 700 survived . We were happy to get into Russian imprisonment . Later I heard that none of the who stood in Birkenau/CAMP lived anymore . They were all gassed . 5 Addition to report of Mr Hodosi I managed the escape from the reception camp Lackenbach/CAMP as follows I worked on road building . We took breakfast next to a forest . Once the opportunity was good and I fled into the forest . After about 3 minutes they noticed that I was missing . They followed me but I could cover my tracks . During my escape I came into a Hungarian area . At Ödenburg/LOC I entered Austrian land again and went to Mattersburg/LOC . From there I took the train to Vienna/GPE illegally of course . Yes my wife was a Gypsy too . The 300 Burgenländer who were gassed were all Gypsies . The reduction from to concerned only Gypsies . In Birkenau/CAMP we were in a part of the camp which was managed as a family camp and which got the name Gypsy camp . The who did military service were made up from all kinds of prisoners . So they were all Gypsies . All 700 who were left were rescued because they went into Russian imprisonment . 1 Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei engl . National Socialist German Workers Party 2 Schutzstaffel engl . Protection Squadron 3 Geheime Staatspolizei engl . Secret State Police 4 prisoner functionary 
Singer lived with husband and two daughters in Barduwitz/CAMP Czechoslovakia/GPE . After the German invasion they sent one girl to England/GPE with a children transport . The couple and the second daughter were sent to Theresienstadt/CAMP in 1942 . Czech Jews had been prepared for the life in the ghetto by information spread by members of the Prague Kultusgemeinde and the Czech guards of the Ghetto . Yet on arrival Mrs Singer was struck by the spirit of desolation and apathy amongst the inmates . Even her own mother and sister showed no signs of joy at being reunited with her . Mrs Singer had had some nursing experience and volunteered for this type of work . She knew that it might give her some protection from deportation the fear of which overshadowed the whole life of the prisoners . In the first very cold winter typhoid broke out . The patients were crammed into attics without the most elementary necessities . Later a hospital was equipped and conditions improved a little . Mrs Singer was infected and after her recovery was ordered to nurse the typhoid patients . Her girl had been sent to a children home run by Dr. Groak who maintained a certain ethical standard among the children . The girl joined a Zionist Group and the special protection of one of the Ghetto Elders himself a Zionist might have saved her from deportation . Quite a lot of bitterness and ill will was caused by the Elders favouring members of their own nationality religious or political group . Mrs Singer husband mother and sister were deported . Mrs Singer was saved by a miracle . She was already standing at the train when she was sent back for no apparent reason . As discipline had crumbled by that time nobody noticed that she did not report back on her return and soon afterwards Theresienstadt/CAMP was liberated . 9 . Further References Dr. Teweles and wife kind doctors in the hospital . Dr. Epstein a Ghetto Elder who was arrested and shot . Dr. Leo Baeck visited patients of Mrs Singer . 10 . Remarks In her account Mrs Singer denies the statements made by Dr. H.E. Bach in the West London Synagogue Review . These were repeated later on by the Dean of St. Paul Matthews . Ghetto Life in Constant Fear of Deportation Mrs. Singer is a Czech Jewess who lived with her husband and two daughters in Barduwitz/CAMP . After the German invasion they still managed to send one of the children with a Kindertransport to England/GPE . In the winter of 1942 she herself together with her husband and the other child was sent to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . Mrs. S. emphasized how much better prepared physically and mentally the Czech Jews arrived at the grey fortress . For a start they were a great deal better nourished because the Czech population was much more well disposed towards Jews than the Germans slipping them whatever food they could spare at all . Mrs. S. is also aware of several cases where Czechs offered to hide Jewish children in safe places to protect them from the worst . Furthermore the Czech policemen guarding Theresienstadt/GHETTO had circulated reports about the conditions there and the Prague Jewish sent its employees out to individual Jewish congregations with instructions to prepare themselves for a life of poverty and work . For that reason the Czechs did not arrive in Theresienstadt/GHETTO as completely unprepared as the German Jews whose luggage contained high heeled shoes and evening cloaks . From Leitmeritz/CAMP onwards the prisoners had to walk and carry their heavy luggage . Upon their arrival in Theresienstadt/GHETTO they immediately gained an impression of the oppressive atmosphere of fear desperation and apathy . At the arrival of a new transport there was always a curfew and no one was allowed to be out on the street . However from their windows people looked down upon the new arrivals . No one nodded at them waved or smiled . Mrs. Singer sister and her 80 year old mother were already in Theresienstadt/GHETTO but even the reunion of family members did not bring a moment of joy . Mrs. S. found her mother in a bare room which she shared with 18 other women lying on the floor . There were no beds . The old lady began to cry bitterly when she saw her daughter and granddaughter again . She was unable to help them help for her had become identical with food old people getting the most meagre rations of all . Upon arriving the newcomers had first to pass through a German sluice gate where they were assigned work . Mrs. S. had had some training in nursing care and immediately applied for care work . She already knew that this would provide her with special protection from being sent to one of the extermination camps . She was immediately separated from her husband . Men were mostly housed in the old barracks 80 to 100 to a room three bunk beds one above the other . During the first very cold winter of 1942 a typhoid epidemic broke out and Mrs. S. worked from morning until night . The sick were placed in attic rooms where it was particularly cold lying on the floor in their totally soiled clothes without bedclothes . There were no medicines to help the sick not even towels to wash them with . All patients were covered in lice but it was not possible to send them for delousing because of the risk of infection . At the start of her shift in the morning Mrs. S. had to inspect the closely crammed together bodies to establish who was still alive and who had died during the night . Often it was barely possible to tell as the people lying there on the floor were totally starved and lifeless . After two months Mrs. S. too contracted typhoid fever . Meanwhile a gymnasium had been converted into a hospital as the Germans fearful the epidemic would spread insisted on isolating those infected with typhoid fever . There were however still no medicines the food was just about sufficient to avoid starvation and although there were many doctors available only nature could help the individual . At that time a couple who were both doctors Drs . Teweles worked at the hospital looking after the sick with great dedication . Their 16 year old girl had also been infected and died owing to the lack of medicines . Later the two doctors were taken to one of the extermination camps . As surviving the illness had left Mrs. immune to typhoid fever she was chosen especially and ordered to care for those infected with typhoid fever . Slowly conditions improved slightly medicines arrived at the camp the constant transports of people to the extermination camps created more space for those left behind and the total apathy that gradually took hold of people did of course help them bear the terrible conditions . One could perhaps even have accustomed oneself to a certain structure of ghetto life if only the fear of the transports and the constant farewells had not continually reignited the sense of terror and agitation . The worst was when the children were deported . Although Mrs. Singer daughter was spared her husband her mother and her sister had to make the journey to death . The daughter had been discharged from hospital by her mother and was sent to one of the children homes that was under the direction of Dr. Groak . He is said to have exerted a very good influence which meant that decent standards prevailed at the home . For inexplicable reasons a number of furniture deliveries arrived at the ghetto as a result of which a few decent pieces of furniture and even a piano found their way to the children home . Here the young girl joined a Zionist group and as the then ghetto Elder was also a Zionist these young people were under his special protection and were therefore saved from deportation . He not only took care of the young people physical welfare by finding them for example gardening work but also saw to it that they did not degenerate completely morally and spiritually . This preferential treatment by whoever was the ghetto Elder at the time based on religious attitude and even more so on nationality had of course considerable disadvantages and created much bitterness and discord . If you wanted to survive Theresienstadt/GHETTO it was eventually said you needed to have four P.G.s – not Parteigenossen party but Polish grandmothers . Ultimately the ghetto Elders decided who would live and who would die . Although the Gestapo ordered that so and so many people were to make up a specific transport the selection of the individuals to be sent was decided by the ghetto Elders and one knew with cynical certainty depending on the relevant Elder nationality who would constitute the majority of that particular transport . Incidentally none of these Elders survived Theresienstadt/GHETTO because they knew too much they were systematically deported to the East/LOC . Just before the and the Russians were approaching the camp the Elder at that time Dr. Epstein gave an address to the effect that he was now the helmsman and would bring his ship safely to harbour . The following day the Germans came for him . When asked about the attitude of non Jews to the internees Mrs. Singer replied that she had had hardly any contact with non Jews . Everything was handled by the Council of Elders individual prisoners did not come into contact with their non Jewish oppressors at all . Some among the prisoners were Christians who had only been made aware of their Jewish ancestry by the Hitler . In Czechoslovakia/GPE only those who had been baptised lying were considered Christians . There were two Viennese women among Mrs. Singer colleagues at the hospital who had never known of their Jewish blood . They were self sacrificing nurses and as Mrs. Singer frankly admitted some of the few who practiced their profession because they loved to help and not because it would protect them from deportation . Altruism and ethical principles could not flourish in the atmosphere of Theresienstadt/GHETTO where at the end of the day everyone had to fend for themselves and self preservation became the supreme law . Mrs. Singer stressed repeatedly that no one who has not been through this kind of camp could possibly understand how the experience deadened every human emotion . Even today she feels that there are no words that can truly reach and get through to the others . As if by a miracle Mrs. Singer was saved from death . She had already been selected for a transport standing with her rucksack at the so called sluice by the train when she was called back . Her daughter had been protected by her gardening work though she did assist together with other young Zionist people with the transports and had promised her mother to jump on to the train at the very last moment so they would stay together . As she did not see her mother she stayed behind . In fact Mrs. Singer should have been issued with a rejection note to continue receiving accommodation and food in the ghetto . However by this time organization in the camp was no longer that tight and no one bothered with these formalities . Many who were summoned for a transport simply did report for the transport and saved their lives that way . After the liberation of Theresienstadt/GHETTO Mrs. Singer lived in Czechoslovakia/GPE until 1949 then went to join the daughter who had emigrated to Israel/GPE from where she came to England/GPE . Mrs. Singer recalls that Dr. Baeck came to visit some of her patients although she is unable to remember that his presence left much of an impression on the patients . Mrs. S. stresses repeatedly how cynical and apathetic life in Theresienstadt/GHETTO had left the prisoners so that the presence of a rabbi no longer made an impression . She herself as a Czech and not much involved with Judaism had never heard of Dr. Baeck so his visits did not mean anything to her . She now thinks that the legend Baeck in Theresienstadt/GHETTO has been retrospectively idealised . Neither had Dr. Baeck been sentenced to death as death sentences did not exist in Theresienstadt/GHETTO nor does the claim that he was saved from death by the Russians correspond to the facts . During the final weeks the Red Cross handled the administration of the camp so there was no need for liberation by the Russians to prevent a death sentence . Had there been any intention of getting Dr. Baeck out of the way at an earlier date the frequent deportations would have provided ample opportunity to do so . 1 Kultusgemeinde and Prager Kultusgemeinde are synonymous with the term Jüdische Gemeinde i.e. the Jewish Congregation . 2 Springer in the German text is obviously a typographical error here . 3 i.e. party members of the NSDAP 4 In German texts of this period British is virtually always referred to as Englisch . 
Neumann an orphan was only 14 years old when in September 1942 she and her aunt had to follow her grandmother to Theresienstadt/GHETTO who was already among the first deportees from Vienna/GPE . The report includes details about the German speaking Kinderheim there modern pedagogical methods a kind of Kibbutz/CAMP where the children were happy in spite of everything . When later her aunt and grandmother were taken to Auschwitz/CAMP she voluntarily followed them with the next transport and met them there . Soon the grandmother was gassed and Edith and her aunt were moved to Hamburg/CAMP for forced labour . Terrible housing conditions Lagerhaus lack of food heavy airraids . The kind Italian Prisoner of War who looked after Edith and the Wehrmachtssoldat one of the guards who wanted to hide Edith with his wife she refusing because of her aunt and a close girl friend whom she did not want to leave . Increasing air raids shifted to Altona/CAMP where conditions were worse . She worked in a cement factory together with Russian and Italian Prisoners of War all kind and helpful especially the Russians . When the British army was approaching she was sent on a Death March to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP where she was ultimately liberated by the English . Edith stayed on in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP until 1948 and put herself at the disposal of the American Joint for relief work . In spring 1948 she emigrated to England/GPE becoming a nurse at University College London . At Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP Irma Grese with her dogs . Edith Neumann born 27 March 1938 When Hitler came to Vienna/GPE Edith was barely 10 years old . Her parents were both dead . Her grandmother took over the role of parent . There was a close bond between the grandmother and grandchild as the former was deported to Theresienstadt/GHETTO Edith only care was the absolute certainty that she would soon follow her there . Now her aunt assumed the role of caring for her . Her aunt was a Nurse at the Rothschild Hospital in Vienna/GPE . This property was annexed to the Cultural Association and it was known from experience that such employees were sent to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . Edith went there with her aunt in 1942 met her grandmother who lived in a room with 12 other women and was again separated from her since Edith was housed in a German children home . A ‘ German children home in this context meant that the children all had a very strong command of the German language in contrast to the Czech children who lived together in another home . The children home was managed in the most exemplary manner by a young Czech man and his four friends . These five splendid men turned the children home into a Kibbutz . It consisted of five to six rooms . Within each room were housed 20 girls between 10 and 16 years of age . On the opposite side was where the boys lived . Within the rooms the bunks were stacked three high . They slept in pairs . So that the room was kept tidy there was a competition amongst the children . The cleanest room received a prize in points . The eldest girl supervised . The elder children taught the younger they learnt languages they also worked within the garden which lay outside the ghetto . Every evening when they came back from work they were searched to see if they had taken an apple or a carrot . The children also had to wear a yellow Star of David Patch . Edith was unable to make sense of the rations she only knew that she suffered hunger yet food played not so great a role as for a child there was so much to see to take in and to understand the separation from her home from her home from her grandmother communal life with so many children and the totally different meaning of life . Somehow life was still worth living until roughly two years later the deportations began . On each occasion people were taken never being seen again . One day the grandmother and aunt were also taken Her aunt also worked as a Nurse in Theresienstadt/GHETTO . Edith did not know where the transport went yet on the next deportation she volunteered for it she did not want to leave her grandmother alone . 2 They travelled in a wagon two days and two nights without food without drink and without sleep . For purposes of ablutions etc .. two buckets were set out . They sat next to each other without being able to move them . During the night the train suddenly stopped . The guards shouted Get out ! They had arrived in Auschwitz/CAMP . They heard terrible screaming it smelled horrifically of human bones . They stood before a square building they saw flames rise . It was the crematorium . Bundles of hair lay roundabout as well as children shoes and clothes . An electric wire circled the camp whoever touched it was killed immediately . The children were warned . Auschwitz/CAMP was divided into different camps children women men and old people . Edith name had been tattooed onto her arm . The scar is still visible today . In England/GPE a Surgeon cut out this Nazi branding . The huts in which they lived looked like stables . Within the so called family camp the women lived on one side the men on the other . They all changed very terribly . They looked like animals . They all got leather straps and were beaten blindly on all sides . The head of the camp was a robber . He had at one time committed a bank robbery and had murdered people during its course . As punishment they sent him to Auschwitz/CAMP . The days proceeded thus Early of a morning at 4 everyone was required for parade called people stood or kneeled until 10 in the morning . Then two SS men came to count . After they had done this we were given a beaker of soup and a slice of bread . From 3 in the afternoon until 6 in the evening was held again . The SS men were mostly drunk and took people spontaneously from the rows of people . A man and a woman were shot dead without any such reason before Edith eyes . They took a baby from the children home and dashed its little head against the wall . After Appel the prisoners were allowed to mix with one another for an hour . And on the second day Edith saw her grandmother and her aunt again . After three weeks during Appel all those between 16 and 36 years of age were taken out . Although Edith was not yet 16 years of age she too reported herself as she knew that were she to stay in Auschwitz/CAMP the gas chamber would await . She and her aunt had to undress completely they were examined probably to see if they were capable of work . Edith did not know what would happen to her . She ran quickly once more to her grandmother in order to say farewell . An SS man stood there with a loaded revolver and urged them to hurry up . Yet the grandmother had time enough to bless her grandchild . 3 Then Edith arrived with her aunt and a friend she met in Auschwitz/CAMP in a women camp where career criminals ran the place . Thousands of women were housed there within a stable block . Within both washrooms with water taps a cruel woman the oldest in the camp governed over them . She had a leather strap in her hand and would beat anyone she could . Those women imprisoned within the camp would be forgiven were they to do without washing altogether . After two days Edith her aunt and the friend went to a delousing station . They all had to get undressed there . They were given prison clothes . After spending four weeks at Auschwitz/CAMP they were all transported in a cattle wagon this time under the watch of German soldiers who were not war veterans . These soldiers were more lenient they had a touch of humanity . Edith was in a very bad state . There was terribly little to eat then the horrific fear in which she continually lived for one of course did not know what would happen from one moment to the next a lack of blood to the brain which makes this whole cruel experience appear so unreal and lacking in care . They travelled for two days and two nights arriving in Hamburg/CAMP and were taken to a camp block this was in May 1944 . Around women were divided into groups and sent to work in a factory guarded by soldiers . Within the block were also housed Italian prisoners of war . The women had to work hard in the factory ... shovelling sand lugging bricks etc . The factory lay far away from the camp huts . At 4 in the morning they were loaded onto boats where they travelled for two hours along the Elbe to the factory . In their thin grey linen clothes they succumbed terribly to the cold . Whenever it rained they took off their wet clothes to wring them and then to put them on again . There was nothing to eat until the afternoon only then a slice of bread and a bowl of soup . Only German boys were employed in the factory . Sometimes they threw them sandwiches . They came back from work at 5 in the evening to the huts . The rooms had long troughs with taps they washed there and then there was soup once more with a slice of bread . This is where Edith experienced the first bombs . During an air raid they had to go down into the shelter . The shelter led to the Elbe where the water was sometimes at a high level . Edith and her friends preferred to sleep in their beds they hid themselves under their beds so that no one found them . They only crept out when everyone else was in the shelter . They were dead tired and slept soundly despite the air raids . As already mentioned Italian prisoners of war were housed in the huts . Edith became friends with one of them his name was Aldo Babieri . He spoke many languages fluently also secretly hidden a warm pullover and some food . He also had a medallion which he gave to her as a gift 4 he got it from his mother . Edith still has this small item of jewellery today . One day when they had to work clearing the streets in Hamburg/GPE people passed by and stared at them . It was only then that Edith became aware exactly how greatly she had changed . She began to cry she began to do so hysterically . Why you shoot me ? she shouted at the soldier who guarded her . He sent her to the guard post and followed her there . He said I feel more for you all than I am allowed to show . I have a daughter she is 15 years old . as old as you are . You remind me of her The soldier whose name Edith did not remember perhaps he was called Kessel often brought her something to eat . As he knew that she shared everything with her aunt and friend he gave her three small parcels one for each of them . He once said to her You speak German . bring you clothes and help you get to Berlin/GPE to my wife . You can stay there until everything is over . Edith refused she did not want to leave her aunt and friend . Four months had passed and they were taken to a camp in Altona/CAMP which was guarded by female members of the SS . These women were terrible even the Camp Commandant was fearful . He threw women to the ground kicked and beat and trampled on them with his hobnailed boots . He was an abnormal person . The eldest within the camp could only keep him calm by going to him and saying how handsome he was and how magnificent to behold . This compliment calmed him . The terrible SS women left Edith and her friend in peace perhaps because they were so young only 15 years old ! They even gave them warm things . Once during a particularly heavy air raid they were sent into a bunker just Edith and her friend . It was in a bridge which had a cement structure and a door . When it was opened you were inside the bunker . Outside bombs rained down . Suddenly the door was torn open and a whole load of Russian prisoners of war entered to hide from the bombs . The two girls were terribly afraid her friend began to scream . The air raid ebbed away and a soldier opened the little window . The Russians asked the girl who she was . They told the men of their fate . The Russian soldiers emptied their pockets and gave them everything they had in terms of confectionery and other things . And when they had nothing else to give they sang Russian songs to them to console them . Edith worked in the cement factory along with Russians French and Italians . The Russians were the kindest they passed on news to them . They were able to find just the right words of comfort . This gave them courage and strength . Edith her aunt and friend had to work very hard they had to build houses canals and trenches . The air raids became ever worse 5 the English troops were not too far away as a result of which the Nazis transported the women to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP concentration camp . The three women withstood three weeks in a room with thousands of women . They lay or sat on top of each other their feet could only find room on other feet . Many women died many suffocated . On the death march to Belsen/CAMP innumerable women were left behind on the roadside they died from weakness or were shot . Irma Grese was there with her dog .... Edith saw her . The worst of all were the Hungarian soldiers who had become wild and who shot incessantly at people even through locked doors . The corpses lay roundabout in large piles . The food was horrific dirty red turnip peelings despite desperate hunger Edith was unable to eat it . For 14 days she ate nothing . She was so weak that she could no longer stand on her feet . She thought that the end had come for her . She crawled over the bodies towards freedom . It was dark yet she recognised a figure approaching her . Bald headed and emaciated she heard her name being called . Dita ! She was a former schoolmate . Edith was unable to answer as she could see a tank enter the camp . The English troops had arrived as liberators . Dita summoned up all her strength crept back into the room to tell the others many did not want to believe it many wept many were apathetic and could do nothing . For so very many freedom came too late ! The English troops arrived with two large pails of soup . Unfortunately those starving people ate too much of the unaccustomed nourishing food .... A great many became sick others died . Edith spent a few days in a wonderful camp for soldiers from where she quickly recovered whilst her aunt and her friend contracted typhus and had to be admitted to hospital . Only Edith remained and made herself available to the English troops . She assumed responsibility for registration duties concerning people from the old camp into Belsen/CAMP . She was one of the last in the old camp . There were people who did not want to go . It took a lot of persuading to get them out of these insanitary conditions they had lost their minds . Captain Gillow did a great deal for these unfortunate people . He helped wherever he could . According to his rank he was probably not the most senior yet he suffered alongside them he helped find Edith aunt and friend . Edith aunt is in England/GPE the friend in America/GPE . This friend who once gave Edith a potato for her birthday whilst at the concentration camp 6 It had been the most delicious gift she had ever received . For this potato not only had an inscribed face it was also edible . Edith Neuman remained in Belsen/CAMP for two years . In 1948 she came to London/GPE . Initially she worked for the American Joint . Then afterwards she trained as a nurse a profession which she very much enjoyed . She worked at one of the best hospitals in London/GPE the University College Hospital . 
report is interesting because it shows the important role the Jewish resistance movement played during the German occupation of France/GPE and the many ways in which it was assisted by the French population . It is written by the above who in 1933 as a child of 6 left Frankfurt/GPE am Main with her parents and her sister and emigrated to France/GPE . As soon as Hitler invaded Northern France/GPE in 1940 the travels of the family started . They were among the thousands and thousands of refugees who crowded the roads to the south of France/GPE stayed at different places which they had always to leave after a short while . Mr Guenzburg the father was several times interned but either was released or succeeded to escape from the camp . In autumn 1943 when the Germans occupied the south of France/GPE the Jewish resistance movement saw to it that all children found shelter . The Resistance was so well organized that it was able to follow up the fate of almost every child . Many of the children were taken to convents and were thought by their surroundings to be Christians . Mrs Unger and her sister were taken to a boarding School at Villeneuve sur Lot where only the director a Protestant knew their origin . In 1944 Mrs Unger and her father crossed the Spanish border in one of the small groups of 10 people regularly organized by the resistance . With the help of the American Joint they finally reached Israel/GPE . Mrs Guenzburg and her other daughter who were staying in a home for aged people belonging to the Heilsarmee at Tonnein/GPE and would not have been able to endure the flight over the mountains followed them a year later . My time as a child refugee in France/GPE Experiences of Frau Eva Unger née Guenzburg/LOC During the Rule of the National Socialists . In 1933 at the time the National Socialists came to power in Germany/GPE I was living with my parents and my elder sister in Frankfurt/GPE Main . My father ran a bookshop there . This was taken over by the National Socialist administration already in early 1933 . As my father also felt himself to be personally in danger he left Frankfurt/GPE and relocated to Paris/GPE . My mother my sister and I followed him about 6 months later . I was 6 years old at the time . In Paris/GPE we lived in peace until the beginning of the war . After the outbreak of war the French authorities issued an order for all families with children to be evacuated from Paris/GPE to the French countryside . The evacuation of the inhabitants of each neighbourhood was designated for a specific department . In September 1939 my father brought us to Nevers near in the department responsible for us . He himself went back to Paris/GPE with the intention of voluntarily enlisting in the military . He was however not accepted – in fact he was interned by the French as a former German . It was only shortly before the German invasion of France/GPE that he was released . My father then attempted to join the Foreign Legion . In this too he was unsuccessful as he did not appear to be physically suited . Eventually he managed to join a British Army labour battalion . We stayed in Nevers until June 1940 . At that time the German troops had already moved into France/GPE . Apparently a defence front was to be formed at the Loire very close to where we were . As a consequence the inhabitants of this region fled southwards . We joined the flow of refugees and came to Château de Chaumont Creuse . There was a children home here belonging to the Jewish organisation OSE where we found accommodation for the time being . By chance we met my father there and were reunited . In September 1940 we relocated to Aubusson/LOC with a few of the other children looked after by OSE as there was a lyceum that we could attend there . Shortly after in November 1940 my father was interned as a German Jew by the Vichy/LOC government and brought to Gurs/CAMP . Later he went to a labour camp but was released in March 1941 as he had leased a piece of land near Aubusson/LOC to convert it for agricultural use which exempted him from internment . 2 He was now restricted only in his freedom of movement and was like us not allowed to leave the place without permission . In Aubusson/LOC we lived as penniless refugees in difficult conditions . We had taken in the children who had been entrusted to us by OSE and who went to the local school together with us and received financial support for this from OSE which was however only very little money and barely sufficient to make ends meet . In the summer of 1942 we learned that the danger for German Jews who had been arrested by the Vichy authorities to be transported back to Germany/GPE had grown immensely . At the time we were constantly in contact with the French Jewish scout movement which had formed resistance groups everywhere . This organisation offered to attempt to get us children to Switzerland/GPE . During this time my sister and I were ourselves constantly wearing scout uniforms as this was safer for us . We agreed to be separated from our parents but were afraid that something would happen to them if our disappearance from the place became known . It was therefore agreed that my parents would say we had run away from them . My sister and I as well as a few other Jewish children were initially brought to Montpellier/LOC . Here we were housed by various families . The plan was to bring us from there to Annecy/LOC where the group of children would be gathered for the crossing to Switzerland/GPE . At the last moment however this plan had to be abandoned because the preceding group that was to be brought to Switzerland/GPE had been sent back to France/GPE by the Swiss authorities . We now went to a children home in Moissac/LOC near Toulouse/LOC which had been set up by the Joint Distribution Committee . Here I was in the care of the director of the home under the alias Evelyne Ginsbourg with Andlau/LOC Bas Rhin as my place of birth . This was necessary to avoid difficulties with the French authorities which occurred especially when they were dealing with foreign Jews over the age of 14 years . The latter were therefore regularly provided with FALSE papers indicating them to be French citizens . Thanks to the good connections the director of the home had with the authorities the latter intervened only rarely and sent a German Jewish resident of the home back to Germany/GPE only every now and again in order to keep up appearances . In the meantime my father had been brought to a labour camp again . When it became known that the camp inmates 3 were to be transferred to Germany/GPE my father escaped from there after being provided with FALSE papers by the Jewish resistance movement . He managed to obtain a position as a worker on a farm . The farmers liked to take on refugees as workers as they did not need to pay them much however they generally did not treat them very well . My mother had stayed behind in Aubusson/CAMP for the time being . When it became too dangerous for her to continue staying there I was sent to her with FALSE papers that had been issued to her . I then brought my mother to the same village where my father was . Here she was taken in by a family . Life in the same place was particularly difficult for my parents as they had different names on their papers and could not show that they were a married couple . The village priest who knew this went out of his way to help them . By contrast the farmer for whom my father was working treated him very badly . When my father fell sick the farmer simply threw him out . After this the resistance movement directed my parents to another village where my father again found work with a farmer . However they soon had to leave this place again as they were in danger of being arrested . They were now brought to Tonneins/LOC farther south . There my parents found work in a Salvation Army retirement home . They were posing as Protestants but the General of the Salvation Army knew who they were . In the meantime the south of France/GPE had also been occupied by the German troops by October 1943 . Shortly before that the Jewish children home in Moissac/LOC like all other Jewish children homes was dissolved as Jews of every age were in great danger of being sent to Germany/GPE . The Jewish resistance movement now searched for new accommodation options for all the children and were successful . The movement was exceptionally well organised and tracked the fate of every individual child . I can not say anything about the type of organisation it was as we were always in contact only with individual members and anything pertaining to their operations was kept very secret . All children were from now on no longer Jews but posing as Catholics or Protestants . Many were taken in by convents . Posing as a Protestant I was taken in by a boarding school for girls in Villeneuve/LOC sur/LOC Lot/LOC in October 1943 together with my sister and a few other girls . I also had to change my name again and was henceforth known as Evelyn Grandjean . Our background was however known to the director as well as to several teachers . In Villeneuve/LOC and already before that in Moissac/LOC too 4 the French police and later also the Germans occasionally carried out raids targeting foreign Jews . We therefore had to be very careful and I went outdoors only rarely . Once when I was in Toulouse/LOC I was stopped by a patrol in the street and asked for my papers . I presented them and simultaneously contorted my face to hide my Jewish facial features as I had been taught . Thankfully the patrol was satisfied . At the time French hatred of the Germans had already greatly increased and they helped us in whatever ways they possibly could . As soon as they had reached a certain age the Jewish youths joined the Jewish underground organisation in solidarity . The good relations that had developed with the French Christian families were demonstrated by the fact that we regularly received invitations from Christian families on the days we had no school Thursday and Sunday where we usually ate until we were properly full . By this time it was 1944 . My father had become tired of life in occupied France/GPE and decided to cross the border to Spain/GPE with me . We could not expect my mother to join in the difficult walk over the mountains because of her health . We left her behind with my sister in the Salvation Army home . The crossing of the refugees to Spain/GPE was led by an organisation that had been created by the French Resistance . Every few days a group of about 10 people set out on the journey with Spanish guides . The guides were not always trustworthy . Shortly before we struck out a group of refugees had been abandoned by their guides and left to wander in the mountains for 10 days . Our guides were trustworthy . After a difficult three day walk over the mountains we slipped over the border unscathed at night . Having arrived in Spain/GPE we escaped the measures of the Spanish authorities who were interning all refugees who were 20 to – I believe – 50 years of age . There we were soon in the charge of JOINT which brought us first to Lerida/GPE then to Barcelona/LOC and finally to Cadiz/GPE . Months later we were able to begin the journey to Israel/GPE from here . As the Germans had in the meantime been driven out of France/GPE my mother and my sister followed us to Israel/GPE a year later . 5 Transcript . Account of the Persecution Eva Unger née Guenzburg . I was born on 20.12.1926 in Frankfurt/GPE the second daughter of Paul Guenzburg and Else née Trefousse . I went to the Schwarzburg/LOC comprehensive school in Frankfurt/GPE from 2.5.1933 to 1.11.1933 . My father was forced to flee shortly after the Nazis came to power and my mother followed him to Paris/GPE in November 1933 together with my sister and me . After I had mastered the French language at an adequate level I could continue my schooling until 1939 . After the outbreak of the World War it became impossible to go to school regularly . My mother my sister and I were evacuated to Nevers/LOC Viévre/LOC in September 1939 . In June 1940 upon the invasion of the German troops we fled to the south of France/GPE and went to de Chaumont Greuse/LOC . In the summer September of 1940 we moved to Aubusson/LOC Creuse/LOC where I was able to go to school again . In Aubusson/LOC we lived as penniless refugees in difficult conditions . In the summer of 1942 it became dangerous to be known to the Vichy authorities as German Jews . My sister and I were entrusted by our parents to an underground movement that unsuccessfully attempted to smuggle us to Switzerland/GPE with a group of other children . We made it close to the border but there we were warned that a group had been captured a few days earlier and had to give up the attempt . We were sent to a children home in Moissac/LOC Tarn et Garonne where I stayed until October 1943 with FALSE papers in the name of Evelyne Ginsbourg born in Andlau/LOC Bas/LOC Rhin/LOC . During my time in Moissac/LOC I could not go to school . In October 1943 we had to leave Moissac/LOC and were brought to Villeneuve sur Lot Lot et Garonne by the French underground movement . There I was taken in by a school under the name Evelyne Grandjean . In Moissac/LOC and in Villeneuve/LOC I was constantly in danger of being reported to the authorities and had to go into hiding during police raids on several occasions . Against my religious convictions I was forced to participate in Christian religious classes and services in Villeneuve/LOC . In July 1944 I managed to pass the first part of the Abitur . Shortly after however I fled to Spain/GPE with my father by walking over the Pyrenees/LOC for three days from there we later emigrated to Palestine/GPE Israel/GPE . It was impossible for me to finish the Realschule and consequently I was unable to fulfil my wish to study medicine . London/GPE 22.2.1957 . signed E. Unger 6 Transcript . Affidavit . I the undersigned Gordin Noémi born on 3.7.1927 in Siauliai/GPE the daughter of Jacob Gordin and his wife Rachel née Zeiber residing at 14 Avenue du Général Clavery Paris/GPE 16th arrondissement declare the following affidavit . I am aware of the meaning of an affidavit and am also aware that a FALSE declaration is a criminal offence . I have known Frau Eva Unger née Guenzburg/LOC since the summer of 1942 when she came to Moissac/LOC Tarn et Garonne together with her sister Ruth Gorans née Guenzburg/LOC . There they were illegally in hiding and lived as French citizens with FALSE papers . The Aryan name of Frau Eva Unger was first Evelyne Ginsbourg and later Evelyne Grandjean . In the autumn of 1943 we were forced to flee Moissac/LOC and I was brought to Villeneuve sur Lot Lot et Garonne by the French underground movement together with the Guenzburg sisters Eva and Ruth . In the summer of 1944 Eva Guenzburg left Villeneuve sur Lot with the intention of fleeing to Spain/GPE . I met Eva Guenzburg again only after the war in Paris/GPE in 1949 . I am not related to Frau Eva unger . In the summer of 1942 the sisters Eva and Ruth Guenzburg were brought there after having attempted unsuccessfully to be smuggled to Switzerland/GPE . In Moissac/LOC they were constantly in danger of being arrested . During the first three months they were hidden and after that FALSE papers were obtained for them with which they were classified as French citizens under the name Ginsbourg . Around October 1943 the Guenzburg sisters were forced to flee Moissac/LOC and were taken in by a boarding school in Villeneuve/LOC sur/LOC Lot/LOC Lot et Garonne . Their papers were changed again this time to the name Grandjean . They were not allowed to go out into the street and never had enough food since they did not possess ration cards . In July 1944 Eva Guenzburg fled to Spain/GPE with her father Ruth Guenzburg went to Montauban/GPE . I am not related to Frau Eva Unger . Paris/GPE 24.10.1957 signed Henri Milstajn Signature authenticated by the German Embassy in Paris/GPE 24 . October 1957 . 

on some small incidents of anecdotal character demonstrating the kind and helpful attitude of the average Berliner towards the Jews . 4 . Date 1933 onwards . 5 . Number of pages 2 . 6 . Author or Source Dr. Martha Mosse November 1955 . 7 . Recorded by as above . 8 . References Berlin/GPE . P.III.f . No.183 Advent 1933 or 1934 a teacher makes some disparaging remarks about the Jews to a class of 6 7 year old little girls . One little one then stands up and says But Fraülein how can you say such a thing when the Lord Jesus is coming soon and when he was himself a Jew ? She sits down and begins to cry . The teacher says Silly child I have to tell you these things because the government wants it that way . But I did not tell you to write it down . At this the child says to the little Jewish girl next to her Tell him that if you meet him . The teacher herself told this story to a lady who is a friend of mine . I was sitting on the bus . No one was wearing the yellow star yet . A small deformed gentleman was sitting next to me who was obviously Jewish . When a lady got on with a girl aged about ten who looked very sensitive and miserable there was standing room only and so the gentleman stood up and offered them his seat . At this the child whispered to her mother That was very kind of that gentleman . The mother replied Yes you see and that was a Jew ! One morning during the first few days after the yellow stars had been imposed on us an official from the Jewish community was setting off from his home . Three small girls who were standing in the road next to the wall of the building made a deep curtsey when they saw him and said Heil Hitler Herr Jew ! When he asked them why they were being so polite they replied Our mother has told us that whenever we see a Jew we should be particularly friendly . He told me this himself . I was on a tram standing by the door at that time we were no longer allowed a seat and also by then we were wearing the yellow star looking out of the window . Then a lady who was obviously a member of the nobility came right up to me and whispered Do be sad . Lots of people think the way I do . Jews were no longer allowed to use public transport . Only officials from the Jewish community had been given special permits from the Gestapo to travel for work purposes as an exception was made under these circumstances . I had to go to a municipal department and got on a tram . The conductress looked at the yellow star and the Gestapo permit and came up to me . You must not stand here ! Your fellow countrymen do want you so close to them . Go and stand there right at the back near the exit . I did so although I had to stand among other passengers in the crowded tram and gave her one mark as I had no change . After a while she came and threw some coins at my feet with the words Here have your money . I did not move but a lady who was standing next to me immediately bent down and picked up all the money for me . A very young soldier said to the conductress If you feel like that you not suited to this work . We are after all a cultured nation . The poor child ! . An old lady obviously a member of the nobility hissed as she was getting out What is the number of this coach ? That woman has to go . That was the only occasion when a member of the public was rude to me . It is worth noting that not one of the people there supported her . 2 During the time when we were no longer allowed to buy any fruit vegetables meat fish etc I knew an official from the Jewish community who told me herself about the following that happened.on the tram . There was a wonderful smell of tangerines and she thought how nice it would be if she could have some one more time . She got out at the station in Friedrich Strasse . Suddenly she heard footsteps first behind and then next to her and noticed a soldier push some tangerines into her bag as he went past . Hardly a day went by without my fellow workers telling me that people they did not know had put fruit meat butter or cigarettes in their bag without being noticed . When a little Jewish girl came into the Jewish community she had a big apple in her hand and her mother told me that a lady wearing a large swastika had quite openly ! given the child the apple on the tram . Even shopkeepers joined in . Some sold forbidden goods to the Jews although at excessively high prices or in exchange for valuables . However the majority tried to help as much as they could on the quiet . For example there was an old potato seller at our market who would carry the potatoes inside for the Jews . A non Jewish lady took her own cards together with those from various people that she knew which had been marked with a J to this very market and bought goods from the stallholders . When on one occasion she was denounced by an effeminate informant who incidentally happened to be Jewish – to an SS man who was standing around at the market and he asked her to show him the contents of her bag and the food ration cards she refused with the comment that he had no police authority and turned to the policeman in charge of supervising the market . He sent the SS man packing and took no further action . This very policeman even went shopping for elderly Jewish ladies who did not have the strength to go into the shops at the times stipulated for Jews using their cards and he would carry the goods into the building for them putting in some fish or meat etc . He would only take the right money and would not accept any reward . He also warned Jewish passers by for example if – which later happened with the Austrian SS a raid on Jewish passers by was going on somewhere in front of them so that they could go a different way . 
Berendsohn and her husband emigrated from Germany/GPE to Denmark/GPE in 1933 . When the Germans marched in in April 1940 the country was crowded with refugees . Mrs Berendsohn husband Prof. Walter Berendsohn worked in the Danish Resistance Movement and in 1943 he had to go into hiding . A German Navy Captain and old friend of Mrs Berendsohn warned her of the forthcoming measures against Jews and advised her to flee to Sweden/GPE . Mrs Berendsohn thereupon co operated with a Mr Bertelsen a university lecturer in building up an organisation which effected the escape of Jews to Sweden/GPE . In the course of this operation many Danes risked and some of them lost their lives . All those who were detected were taken to concentration camps in Germany/GPE . The author states that from Norway/GPE about 700 Jews had been deported and later gassed as early as 1942 . Walter Berendsohn escaped to Sweden/GPE with the help of the Resistance Movement . Dora Berendsohn and her daughter followed on 14 October 1943 on one of the last transports . Danish doctors nurses railway officials students and policemen risked their lives to take small groups to a meeting place on the Danish coast . These refugees were smuggled into Sweden/GPE in fishing boats under constant danger from German Navy patrols . In Sweden/GPE they were received with great hospitality . Refugee life in Denmark/GPE and escape to Sweden/GPE Dear Sister I had long intended and looked for time to describe in detail how it went for us in the years from 1933 45 . I think above all of the years 1940 – 1943 before we came to Sweden/GPE . Although we have seen each other in the meantime several times in fact but whenever the conversation turned to this time you hardly listened or you told with such depth and dramatically of your experiences in Germany/GPE that I kept my mouth shut . At least on this topic . By no means do I want to diminish what you have gone through in your life the heavy bombing nights the hunger the constant worry about husband and sons in the battlefield . You and the other sisters after all you had to hand over your most beloved . – You always thought we abroad had nothing to cope with we had plenty of everything because we sent you packages of whatever we had left over . We ourselves went without regarding the food as well as clothing so that you probably had the impression that we must be doing very well . But we thought of our old mother of your little children and the children of the other sisters . We did not enjoy the food if we could not share it with you so to speak . But we had to work for it work hard . Our savings disappeared in the first years after 33 in Denmark/GPE . It is after all always difficult to find a footing in a foreign country – and in addition came the sadness and worry for home . Try sometime to move abroad as people between 40 and 50 years old with little children and to start from scratch with a new language abroad . After all with we had to go through this starting from scratch in a new language again ten years later when we fled to Sweden/GPE . We have found many good friends and in the most difficult time for us from 1940 43 in Denmark/GPE it became apparent how they stood with us . In April 1940 one morning German planes came over Denmark/GPE and occupied the peaceful country . From then on everything was dark in the evening and the brightly lit strip of coast on the Swedish side of the Öresund/LOC seemed to us like a Fata Morgana . 2 We were captured and felt like that too . There was no way out anymore as all the borders were closed . The small country was literally bought up by the hungry German soldiers and by a stream of refugees who had lost their home through bombs or had been chased out by the enemy . They came rolling up from Germany/GPE and added to it all . Schools barracks large offices and dancing halls were requisitioned and these poor innocent people slept by the hundreds on the floors sparingly provided with bedlinen clothing and food . There were thousands and thousands . They were hated by the Danes because they brought poverty and worry to their country . – Just at that time when the Nazis attacked Denmark/GPE – 9 April 1940 – our daughter Karin was confined to her bed as a result of a knee injury and was lying in traction . As she had a place at the window she heard – and saw – the airplanes bearing Swastikas one morning circling over Copenhagen/GPE and knew immediately what that meant . She screamed and cried and said father would be murdered now . She had to go to him immediately . The whole hospital came running doctors and nurses tried to calm her down and to tell her that it was the Germans – but she knew better . She had after all seen it . From then on we were exposed and lived in constant fear . That lasted until 1943 . Then the government resigned and the German had a free hand . Many political opponents had managed to escape were partly in hiding many were shot . One was now expecting the persecution of the Jews and those people who were working in the resistance movement . Walter had already tried every so often in the three previous years to disappear from the scene . He was however known throughout the country through lectures at schools further education colleges universities and associations in the country . Wherever he happened to be it news of his presence immediately spread like a wildfire through the town or the village . But now when it became really serious he thought of a hideout in Copenhagen/GPE . A good friend had once said to him that in an emergency he could rely on his help . It was a well known Dane who had a good standing in public life . One day Walter was then settled there but I had no idea who this emergency helper was . I was meant to know anyway . I could reach Walter through a chain of connections if necessary . In the meantime we heard again and again from many sources that this or that person had been picked up by the Gestapo but these were still only single events . It was a very unsettled time . 3 When I came home one afternoon there was a letter from a childhood friend who as captain of a corvette with the German navy was based outside Copenhagen/GPE and urgently wanted to speak to me – and indeed had to . We had not seen each other forever for many years but he had heard that I had emigrated to Copenhagen/GPE also found out my current name – and so I was easy to find in the telephone register . In the letter he asked me to make an immediate call to the Hotel Astoria as he would have to sail off again very soon . I was in a state of great agitation and really did not know what to do . Although he had been here in civvies to put the letter in our letter box himself but if he dared to go into a Jewish house then I as a non Jewish woman could also dare to do this . After all it had to be something important . As I was invited an hour later to our good friend Reader Bertelsen I decided to discuss everything there . Bertelsen is by now Rector at the Cathedral School in Aarhus/LOC . I can still see today how surprised Bertelsen was and with what interest he listened to me . He immediately allowed me to make a telephone call even though as was said all conversations were tapped . He was one of the resistance people after all ! I kept it short and promised to be at the hotel the following morning . There I found out that large scale persecution of Jews would now take place and he advised me that I should immediately transfer my husband to Sweden/GPE . I had hardly returned home when Bertelsen came and wanted to find out what was so urgent . I quickly told him he jumped up and said we have to get going immediately and do everything we can to help . I joined in and helped from one day to the next to build up an organisation and to prepare the ways by which then about Jews reached Sweden/GPE . Many SS people and soldiers must have been bribed otherwise this great campaign would have never succeeded even if everything happened in the dead of night . There were several more organisations alongside the political ones already existing were strengthened . These had already for a long time brought individuals to freedom and I have to say very many risked their lives and some of them lost their lives . – There was work to do day and night . Well meaning and well off people could be found aplenty . Of course everything had to take place in silence and be carried out without being noticed and a lot of money was needed . But the number of people who understood what was at stake was great . Students doctors professors police businesspeople fishermen railway staff – everyone contributed where it was needed . Cars were sent out to the most remote areas in Denmark/GPE when it was found out that a Jew was still living here or there . Friends provided apartments to sleeping there was good supply of ? food . Hospitals took in people under FALSE names . 4 I had not been able to sleep in my apartment for quite a while as it had turned out that twice at night gangs of heavily booted German and Danish Nazis wanted to bring us in . Our landlord who lived on the ground floor of the villa called in those people on the second occasion and questioned them . He said the family Berendsohn had not been in Denmark/GPE for a long time . He also asked what they wanted from Mrs B after she all she was not a Jew . The answer was if she had been married to a Jew for 25 years she is one too . /The landlord too and his wife later had to leave Denmark/GPE i e quickly disappear because they were active in the underground movement/ The black booted Nazis avoided daylight so I dared to spend a few daytime hours in our apartment . During these hours too I was in constant fear but I had to be there to be reachable . From near and far people came to me strangers persecuted people who had heard I knew a way to Sweden/GPE . In such situations you get to know people . Despair worry fear – after all it was about life ! How did they know my name my address ? Everything happened like wildfire . It only in a situation like that that one gets to know oneself and sees one strengths growing at such a time – and the fear disappearing . As an individual I could do little . The large number of people of goodwill worked together for the fixed goal . I could only direct those people who came to me to other addresses first of all places to stay because nobody dared to stay in their own apartment anymore . One could get money consolation and a quick prospect of freedom . There was literally no sleep for days and weeks one could not one did not want to they all had to be saved first ! Friendships for life came out of that . Now I have to go back dear sister for in the meantime Walter had been transported to Sweden/GPE . One day Frau Dr. S. sent news to us that this evening my husband was to be at 10 at the coast at the small train station X he immediately had to go to Sweden/GPE . I tried my luck at quickly reaching Walter and then met him in the dark at Hellerup/LOC station in a small café . We had not seen each other for a long time and we were facing hard times . Whether it would yes it worked but only just about by the skin of our teeth ! It was the Danish resistance movement that transported him even before the persecution of Jews set in ! A few months later Walter became seriously ill probably as result of the very difficult flight of which he himself has written quite a bit . For several months he lay in a critical condition in a sanatorium in Falun/LOC high up in the mountains very prettily situated . The Danes paid for that too we were still in their care . 5 Walter courageous host in Denmark/GPE was shot at night in his bed very soon after Walter flight . His wife was Jewish which Walter did not know . She and the son also had to flee the daughter stayed with the father and she witnessed the attack . So now many thousands of women children and men were getting to Sweden/GPE within three weeks through many helpful hands who again and again were risking their lives . But one does think of that is always obsessed with the idea of helping . Some transports were unfortunately discovered the people were sent to Germany/GPE and Theresienstadt/GHETTO ca 900 people . But nearly all of them by a stroke of luck came back unlike the Norwegians from where about 700 Jews including Walter relatives all /6/ were sent off to Germany/GPE and gassed . That was already in 1942 . Only few could save themselves . I was told that it was time to disappear . The senior doctor of the hospital in which Karin was kept under a FALSE name gave me a hint as the girl was sick with anxiety fear and yearning for the father of whom she knew that he had long been in safety . So one day I also had to be ready . My wish and my last word to Walter before he went off into the unknown was to save as many Jews as was in my powers was fulfilled as I had the great fortune to have Bertelsen as my friend . Because of that I was within a large organisation that did everything that was possible and had the means to do it . See also Bertelsen book Oktober 43 published in Aarhus/LOC 1952 in Danish and in translation also in USA/GPE and in Israel/GPE . There were now practically no Jews anymore in Denmark/GPE only a few stayed in hiding for the whole years thanks to caring courageous people who had taken them in . Many helpers finally also had to disappear and so Karin and I came with one of the last transports in a dramatic way to Trelleborg/CAMP a harbour town on the southern point of Sweden/GPE . That was on 14 October 1943 . I have to add that such transports were attempted along the whole Danish coast and as German patrol boats with torches were out at night every transport was again a risk . Once again it was doctors nurses hospitals railway staff students policemen and civilians who fearlessly led the fight against the Nazis . Always endangering their own lives they took us in very small groups of 3 – 5 people from one place to another from the car to the train . This time the collection point was a small hotel in southern Denmark/GPE where about 15 endangered 6 people came together including those who wanted to get across Sweden/GPE to England/GPE to join the fight there . In the hotel upstairs on the first floor there was a little hall laid out and to calm our spirits we were served the loveliest dishes . The chef the waiters all of them were in the know . From there it continued in three cars after it had got dark through a large forest for about an hour to a remote / children summer home . It was heated and everything was prepared . There too we had to wait again for several hours . Again we got sandwiches tea from thermos flasks . There were about four helpers from the underground movement who were with us three students and one nurse . The wait was difficult but eventually we got the sign to get back into the car . We drove for half an hour through the forest along the coast to a little fishing harbour . There was our boat . We were stowed one by one in the storage room . There were benches up and it smelled of herring as usually there was fish stored there . It was nearly dark down there but we silently put up with everything . The goal was in sight and we hoped for freedom . The eternal hours that followed were incredibly difficult . We had to get around minefields storms and rain started . Our little nutshell caused us to be thoroughly shaken and many of us lay on the floor feeling very seasick . There was no toilet . Every one of us was a heap of misery when we looked at each other the following day in the light in Sweden/GPE . The feeling of happiness when long before we were on land the fishermen called down to us Sweden/GPE in sight ! was indescribable . We could not have had a warmer welcome from Swedish customs and the police officers . Everything was taken care of and in a gymnastics hall camping beds had been put up where we were initially all housed . Boats had also arrived in the previous days and the little town was full of refugees . The following day everyone was to be transported to a summer hotel in the centre of Sweden/GPE where a refugee camp had been set up . As everybody coming from Denmark/GPE was only allowed to carry the absolutely necessities with them a small hand carried suitcase of a bag everybody was clothed and given warm dry stuff . – I was at the end of my strength after weeks of hard and dangerous work and needed to be on my own . Therefore I asked first of all to move into a hotel there on the square with my daughter for a short while . As I had last minute by friends been given Swedish money 7 that would have worked . I also had Danish crowns that eventually I could exchange for Swedish ones . At the police office they said that they could not make an exception . I would have also liked to get in touch with Walter who in the meantime had been given somewhere to stay by his friend Professor Lamm and a job by another friend . The police wanted as already said to send me on the following day there was no hotel room available there were conferences and we would have to leave in a closed troop and stay under supervision . I went back to the police again and this time got hold of the most senior police officer I was very lucky . This man knew Walter from his previous lecture tours in southern Sweden/GPE he also knew Professor Lamm . I immediately got a lovely big room at the city hotel where we then stayed for three weeks before we could get to Stockholm/LOC . There we finally reunited with Walter and were able to move into a small apartment which we got purely by chance . There we could finally breathe more freely and begin a new life . After all those dark year our eyes were now blinded by the illuminated shop windows and advertisements . The way we enjoyed our weeks in Trelleborg/CAMP is indescribable . Above all it was light and free around us ! Everything we had not seen for years was spread out in front of us in the shops . From our hotel window we saw a beautifully laid out fruit shop . I immediately sent Karin down there she was to buy a large bag of the most wonderful things . She did it with joy and enthusiasm . In the evenings we talked on the telephone to Walter who of course was very glad that we had arrived in Sweden/GPE in one piece and healthy albeit traumatised . Yes dear Anni now we had arrived in our third home . Now 12 years later one can say that luck had once again stayed with us . We had only had a little suitcase with us a tiny one and only a little money and nothing to furnish an apartment and to pay for it . We only had our strength will and the desire to get back to calm circumstances . An apartment was then a highly valued item and still is now . This time it was Swedish people who helped us to get going . It all moved forward even though Walter serious illness already mentioned above interfered . It was of course a great concern but it too was dealt with . Progress was made with diligence and great sticking power . After all you know what Walter is like when he wants to achieve something . I have often admired him how then already over 60 he again managed to muster 8 so much power of resistance to start anew again . And today at 72 he is still busily working But in the meantime we have seen each other and talked . What I have reported today I wanted to put down in writing so that you can read it in peace and we can talk about it later . 
Demuth left Germany/GPE in March 1933 . Shortly afterwards he took over the leadership of the Notgemeinschaft deutscher Wissenschaftler i m Ausland founded by Philip Schwartz who was then called to Istanbul/GPE in Switzerland/GPE . He continued with this activity when he moved to England/GPE in 1936 . He got his certificate of discharge and an indemnification of RM 10 in 1934 and is now receiving his pension . 8 . References Antisemitism in Switzerland/GPE Herr Braunschweig . Riechstagsabgeordneter and Stadtverordneter Oskar Meyer . Funk chief editor of Berliner Börsenzeitung . Industrie club Düsseldorf/LOC Thyssen Oppenheim/LOC September 1932 three weeks later Hitler . Reichsverband der Industrie Frowein . Gelpke der Berliner Handelskammer . The Chairman of the Jewish committee in Zurich/LOC was extremely helpful . Until 31 December 1935 in Zurich/LOC then London/GPE . Formerly Syndikus der Berliner Handelskammer and curator der Hochschule fuer Politik . Interview with Geheimrat Demuth Privy Councillor Demuth left Germany/GPE back in March 1933 . Someone had warned him that he would be arrested the next day if he did not leave of his own accord . He had been accused of spreading stories of atrocities as propaganda . With the usual point being made that The whole thing will just take a few months but why subject yourself to all the unpleasantness that will ensue during that time he was strongly advised to leave the country . Privy Councillor Demuth left Germany/GPE in a sleeping car and had absolutely no trouble at all crossing the Dutch border . The whole process was so easy in fact that he assumed that orders must have been issued to allow him to leave freely ? ! . Demuth had friendly ties with a number of the foreign embassies in Berlin/GPE and they very generously put themselves at his disposal before he left . For example one member of staff at the French Embassy approached him to pass on regards from Poncet himself and to offer their assistance . When Demuth first emigrated he found himself in Switzerland/GPE . As soon as he had arrived there he got involved with the organisation Notgemeinschaft deutscher Wissenschaftler i m Ausland Emergency Association of German Scientists Abroad founded by Professor Philip Schwartz and he soon took over leadership when Professor Schwartz was summoned to Istanbul/GPE . The organisation was predominantly active between 1933 and 1939 continuing on a smaller scale up to 1949 . Over the years they managed to achieve a great deal . The rigidity of the regulations in Switzerland/GPE made it hard to make progress there but Mr Braunschweig the President of the Jewish Committee was very willing to offer help . Antisemitism was rife in Switzerland/GPE and impoverished emigrants were treated horribly . 2 Privy Councillor Demuth then continued with this work in England/GPE from 1936 seamlessly shifting over to work for the Central Joint illegible European Committee and the Ministry of Economic Warfare during the war . He interviewed refugees for the Foreign Office who reported to the government shortly after the outbreak of war or even later provided information relating to the pioneers and so on . He worked directly on behalf of the Cabinet and compiled some 5000 reports over the years . In 1940 he focused heavily on getting prisoners released . When asked at what point he first became aware of the danger posed by the Nazi Party and started to take it seriously Demuth mentioned the following incident In January 1930 ? his colleague Oskar Meyer Member of the Reichstag German parliament and Municipal Councillor came to his office and explained his view that the situation was intolerable . Oskar Meyer wanted to leave Germany/GPE and suggested that they should both go together so that it would be seen as taking a stand . He did not think that going alone would have any impact . Demuth considered this level of alarm to be excessive and decided not to leave . Oskar Meyer also ended up staying in Germany/GPE . Shortly after this episode Judicial Councillor Waldschmidt announced that he too wanted to get out . Demuth was involved with the central economic organisations and wholesale and retail associations in Germany/GPE and he also had ties with the trade unions . The umbrella organisation assembled for regular meetings and there was still a lot of uncertainty surrounding the Nazi party and their manifesto within such circles in 1932 . Nobody was clear about what they were trying to achieve . On that basis Funk who was Editor in Chief of the Berliner Börsen Zeitung newspaper at the time was invited to attend a meeting so he could be asked As you know the Nazis can you tell us what exactly it is they want ? As another rather typical story from the same period goes The Chamber of Commerce ran a holiday home in Riga/LOC for tradesmen and before the party had even come to power the people in charge wanted to introduce a 3 numerus clausus . Demuth opposed this but they found another Member of the Board who was willing to sign the corresponding restrictive regulation . In September 1932 Demuth spoke at the Industry Club in Düsseldorf/LOC where he urged all members to stay firmly in the centre . He said that any other approach would lead to rearmament and warned that a second world war would then be inevitable . He managed to convince his audience that his arguments were well founded with the sole exception of Thyssen which was to be expected . Oppenheim did also have his own doubts . The purpose of the session was merely to enter into a discussion with a view to clarifying the situation . No vote was held or agreement made . Three weeks later Hitler spoke in front of the same committee for several hours . In the end he managed to win them all over with the promise that the Nazis would dissolve the trade unions and instead establish state associations . This was crucial in Hitler success in getting everyone on his side . Demuth view on this now is It was a clear victory and everything that came later was undeniably a consequence of this . Within the National Industry Association an umbrella organisation with just ten members Frowein announced that he had been liaising with the party shortly after they came to power . Frowein was the leading intellectual figure within the national association and he gave a speech at this time along the following lines We all saw how things progressed after 1918 . At first there was a whole lot of noise about the move towards Socialism and so on . But then it all came to nothing . The exact same will happen this time too . Just do be so afraid . In the summer of 1932 Gelpke President of the Berlin/GPE Chamber of Commerce had asked Demuth for help on behalf of his son in law who was in serious financial trouble . Demuth obliged meaning that Gelpke was very much in his debt . 4 He promised that he would support Demuth at all costs . According to Demuth today this lasted all of five minutes ! Demuth received his certificate of discharge in 1934 and a one off compensation payment of Mark but nothing further . He now receives an adequate pension which in his own words allows him to live quite comfortably . 

November 1938 Mrs W. was arrested by the Mayor of the small town with the hearty approval of a big mob who demolished her house . The Warden his wife and the bailiff were very kind to her . After sixteen days she was released and Mayor Hummel was reprimanded for his action . 8 . References ‘ Rassenschande Amtsgericht Freiberg . The Tenth of November 1938 Incidents in a small town in the Erzgebirge/LOC . The story of Mrs. W. can be understood best if a few seemingly unconnected incidents are related first . Mr. and Mrs. W owned a laundry . They had a partner in it a Sozius and there was an arrangement that if this method of running the firm was not to the liking of either party they could terminate it after a period of five years . In that case the laundry would revert back to Mr. and Mrs. W. Yet the Sozius had other ideas he wanted to drive out Mr. and Mrs. W. and since he could not do it by fair means he was prepared to do it by foul . He tried to denounce Mr. W. of Mietwucher/LOC overcharging on the rents . He accused them of being involved in illegal abortions . He also accused Mr. W. of Rassenschande . The Rassenschande case went to court and the judge who could see that the whole case was a put up job gave judgement in favour of Mr. W. This was at the Amtsgericht in Freiberg/LOC . On the 9th of November Mr. W. and his son were in England/GPE . Still in Germany/GPE in the Erzgebirge was Mrs. W and her parents . They lived in a nice house there respected by all . On the 10th of November unaware of what had happened in Paris/GPE in the 9th November 1938 Mrs. W went to the Rathaus the townhall to pay some taxes . In the town hall she heard ominous murmering Volksgemurmel and the Bürgermeister called Mr. Hummel came up to her . 2 You are herewith under arrest . You are responsible for the murder of Rath . When Mrs. W. tried to speak and explain she shouted down Jude bleibt Jude once a Jew always a Jew . She was dragged on to the market square and there from the stairs of the town hall the Bürgermeister delivered a speach . To make sure of a large audience the school had been closed early and the less pleasant people of the village and some students had assembled to listen . The policeman was conspicuous by his absence . The speach promised the Jews that they would be shown how things would turn . Then with the audience following her Mrs. W. was marched off to her home . There the laundry workers were assembled . The mob that is what the crowd had turned in to went into the house breaking things . Mrs. W. was asked whether she owned any arms . She admitted to having a revolver . The Bürgermeister found an airgun from Mrs. W son and was very proud of his discovery . In the yard the Bürgermeister made another speech in which he mentioned thigs which he could have learned only from the Sozius . A big pile was made of forbidden literature and other books and also old bibles which Mr. W had been collecting over years . They were burned . Other valuable things lost during this morning was jewelery from Mrs. W mother and her daughter . While some of the people who went into the house were causing a havoc inside others threw stones through the window . Yet some of the people who went into the house were different . They hid things which they thought had sentimental value . They hid them beneath beds . 3 At about six that evening when Mrs. W had just had time to clear up a little after the mob had left the Bürgermeister arrived with the gun . When Mrs. W said that she had always admitted to having this gun he shouted Shut your dirty mouth Halten Sie Ihr ungewaschenes Maul At seven the police arrived to take Mrs. W. into protective custody . The policeman was most curtious asked who would look after the canary and when they were in the street offered to walk ahead so that it did not look too much like an arrest . Mrs. W declined the offer . Her remarks to his offer were If anybody has to be ashamed at this moment it should be you . Mrs. W. spent 16 days in jail . It was the Amtsgefängnis . The warden and his wife were very kind to her . On Sunday she was visited by the bailiff and was most upset at her fate . Mrs. W. worked in jail trimming feathers . Mrs. W brother came from Dresden/CAMP on the 10th November . He had to carry his radio a Telefunken into the Schützenhaus and he had a screaming mob follow him . He got back safely though from delivering the radio but was arrested later that night and sent into concentration camp . Mrs. W. feels that her affair would not have happened if the Amtshauptmann a senior official had not been on leave . As soon as he returned she was released . 4 The Bürgermeister was reprimanded over his action in privet but the news leaked out . To justify himself he said that letters were exchanged between members of the W. family in which they said that the Nazis were like a comet on the sky and that they would disappear in the same way . This provoking letter was found only much later than the incident had taken place . The fact that the Bürgermeister had to justify himself at all is most interesting . Among the people who lived in this small place were many kind folk . The warden in jail was kind to Mrs. W. and was concerned when he learned that her brother had been taken to jail . He said to her on the morning after the arrest How did you sleep . We could not sleep all night and just sat up smoking cigarettes all the time . This same man collected toys for the children of a Russian prisoner shortly before his release at Christmas . He also phoned Mrs. W. after her release to ask her how she was . And yet there had been the mob composed of otherwise normal citizens who ransacked a house burned books thew stones and were rude and vulgar . And neither the Bürgermeister nor the Sozius can claim for themselves the excuse if it is one that they were only ignorant people momentarily fooled . They were deliberately malicious . A small town composed of many people ! 
report on the murder of Rechtsanwalt Dr. Weiner Chemnitz April 1933 . After Kristallnacht Mr Flieg was taken to the police prison where he caught sight of Rabbi Dr. Fuchs whose face was full of blood . With the help of an Aryan doctor the rabbi got into the Hospital and could avoid Buchenwald/CAMP where to all the other Jewish men from Chemnitz/CAMP were deported . Atrocities at the arrival . Interview with Mr and Mrs David Flieg London/GPE On the day of the 1933 boycott the chairman of the local branch of the R.j . F. Jurist Dr. Weiner was collected from his house . He had set up an alarm for the police . His wife asked him if she should set off this alarm to which Weiner said no . He went to his desk and took out his officers patent and thought that this would keep him safe because he took it with him . He was put in a car which drove through a forest . Here he is supposed to have been told to get out and walk into the forest which W. also did . And then he was shot in the back and killed . On the day of the 1938 pogrom Herr . Flieg in his villa on the outskirts of Schönau/LOC lay in bed with heart troubles and was arrested from there . He was taken to the police prison . Here in a corridor he saw the local Rabbi Dr. Fuchs whose face was completely covered with blood and who looked terrible . Yet because of this Dr. Fuchs did not end up in a K.Z. An ‘ Aryan doctor saw to it that he was admitted to a hospital in Chemitz/CAMP and out of humanity exaggerated his descriptions of the wounds so that Dr. Fuchs could stay in the hospital . All the other Jewish men in Chemitz/CAMP were taken to KZ/CAMP Buchenwald/CAMP . His brother in law Jurist Hartmann with the impression of the famous and terrible march in Buchenwald/CAMP in mind wanted to persuade Flieg to commit suicide together . Jurist Hartmann was chairman of the Saxonia – Loge B.B and was prominent in Jewish life there . Flieg calmed Hartmann and rejected suicide as H. realised . A man from Chemitz/CAMP was beaten to death in a bunker in Buchenwald/CAMP another by the name of ‘ teinhard died after his release as was the case with a man named ‘ Grünberg who had bladder troubles . On the march Jurist Cohn helped the severely war wounded Wangenheim from the lorry in which they were brought to the camp . In doing so he was so severely injured that he collapsed covered in blood . In spite of this he made it known that W. was war wounded . Cohn had sustained a severe head injury . A man from Chemitz/CAMP was mentally disabled . A certain Simon was only able to save him by laying him among the plies of dead . Simon lives still . In Chemitz/CAMP the window panes of all the shops were destroyed . In the district of Ober/LOC Wuchwitz/LOC a house was destroyed . In the Villa Fliegschen in the district of Schönau/CAMP a pane of glass was destroyed . The officials of the responsible police station Siegmar/LOC were very humane and watched over the Jewish houses after this . In the warehouse Schocken/LOC large damages were perpetrated . The perpetrators had obviously not known that that the company had just been bought by a British corporation . This is later said to have received compensation . Already in Buchenwald/CAMP myself the affair was related to me by Dr. Curt Cohn then a member of the Regional Court and now a member of the Supreme Court of the DDR in Berlin/GPE . 
M. van Iperen was a Dutch Christian and was manageress of a grocer shop in  Amsterdam/GPE . On the outbreak of the war she joined the Resistance . The account describes in detail her various activities . She also participated actively in the strike of Dutch workers in sympathy with the Jews . In October 1942 the SS came to her house . She had built a hiding place for all incriminating material and succeeded in stowing everything away before the men led by Lages chief of SD forced their way in . Mrs M. van Iperen and 3 friends were arrested . They had been denounced by one of their colleagues who had been caught . The Gestapo never found the hiding place and throughout the interrogations at Euterpestraat/STREET Mrs M. van Iperen never confessed anything . At first she was in Amstellveenscheweg/CAMP prison but after the fifth unsuccessful questioning she was taken to a coffin like cell in Weterino Schans prison and confronted with the informer . She still denied everything and was taken to a punishment cell in Amstellveenscheweg/CAMP in complete darkness by day and glaring lights at night . After 4 days she could return to her old cell and the interrogations continued . In January 1943 she was allowed to work and this enabled her to disseminate news and letters among her fellow prisoners . Twice she was denounced for these activities and was eventually sent to Vught in June 1943 . Here she had to work for Philips . In February 1944 there was a tragic incident As a result of a denunciation by a German prisoner Mrs Jedzini a fight broke out amongst the women in the course of which Mrs Jedzini was shot by a guard . The 92 participants were locked overnight in a tiny prison cell and 15 of them suffocated . In September 1944 the prisoners could hear the guns firing and on 7 September Vught was evacuated . Mrs M. van Iperen travelled for days in a cattle truck without food or water or lavatory . On arrival in Ravensbrück/CAMP they had to stand for 2 days and nights out of doors . Then they had to exchange their clothes for dirty verminous rags no shoes or knickers . Their barrack was built for 300 but housed . 11 women shared a mattress in three tiered bunkers . Out of 5 lavatories only one worked . Mrs M. van Iperen had to work for Siemens for 12 hours per day . She worked in the Nickelei where parts of aeroplanes were chromium plated . The acid in the material corroded their clothing and the air became poisoned . The workers therefore received an extra ration of half a pint of milk . Their lunch consisted of half a pint of warm water with potato peels or turnips . Towards the end of the war work for Siemens stopped and Mrs M. van Iperen returned to the general camp . In order to escape work in the quarry she hid behind a loose board in the ceiling above the bed of her friend Hilde Sternberg . Via Sweden/GPE Mrs M. van Iperen returned to Holland/GPE but her sufferings have left her a very ill person . 10 . Further References Riek Suel and Jo Elsendoorn fellow prisoners in police car . De Groot Jewish fellow prisoner in Amstelveenscheweg/CAMP prison for whom Mrs M. van Iperen smuggled a letter out of prison . See also account by Hilde Sternberg P.Ill.h . Ravensbrück No . 823 for further information . Work and Sufferings of a Non Jewess Mrs M. van Iperen is Dutch by birth and lived at one time in Amsterdam/CAMP where she worked as the manageress of a grocer shop . Mrs van Iperen is a non Jew . Immediately after the outbreak of war she became involved with an illegal group part of the Dutch Resistance movement . She first came into contact with these illegals through her work at the grocer shop . She sold pamphlets and used the money raised to help those who were in hiding . These included not only Jews but also anyone holding left wing political views . Mrs v. I. was also able to provide these illegals with extra food rations . She became a member of the group in December 1940 and started to shop for the Jews in her lunch break as they were not allowed to do so themselves during normal shop hours . The Jews then started coming to her to pick up their parcels . During the night she used to go out into the street and stick up anti Nazi posters . A curfew was in place between one and five in the morning during which time she too was not allowed to be out on the streets . She also operated a courier service delivering letters from one individual to another . She collected money from addresses given to her cash to be used to help those in hiding . She even went to pick up incendiary bombs which she then delivered to another part of town . Someone always accompanied her on these missions to make sure there were no accidents en route . The recipients would then place the bombs where they would destroy valuable German materials . She was then instructed to learn shorthand and typing . During the night it was her task to transcribe text onto wax plates for use in printing illegal newspapers . The paper and wax plates had to be bought out of her own money . Other members of the resistance movement would come to collect these newspapers and then 2 distribute them to smaller outlets from where they were sold . She continued with this work every night and on Sundays . She had a free evening once a week and a Sunday off every fortnight . If something particular happened and extra duties were required she gave freely of her time . Sometimes she worked until 4 5 or even 8 in the morning . One of her tasks was to grind sugar into a fine powder which was then used to make incendiary bombs . The resistance workers decreed that everyone should wear a yellow star including Christians . This was then retracted for fear that the Germans would arrest them in reprisal and that would put an end to the work they were doing . It was also felt that having everyone wear the yellow Star of David armband would in fact do little to help the Jews . Interested parties came to Mrs van Iperen shop to buy illegal newspapers . At this time people knew the bare minimum about each other one man was unlikely to know the identity of another man or anything else about him . Anti Jewish measures were becoming more and more stringent . Mrs van I. saved up food to give to the Jews . Her workplace was in the north of  Amsterdam/GPE . In February 1942 workers from the Fokker plant and other factories came to her among many others warning them to stock up on food supplies and go home early . They were about to stage a strike to oppose the anti Jewish measures that were being enacted . The last ferry into the centre of the city where they lived left at two . All the shops were shut . Almost the entire province of Nordholland/LOC was involved in the protest . The tram drivers ‘ aim was to cause major disruption on the street called the Munt and Mrs van I. was involved in this action . Afterwards the strikers all went home to lie low for a few days . The whole time this was going on the Germans marched through the streets armed with bayonets and guns . If anyone dared come to the window to look out the Germans immediately shot at them . After three days the strike intended simply as a demonstration of support for the Jews was over . 3 The work of the underground movement continued . Mrs van I. was now involved solely with the production of posters and newspapers . The identities of those who came to collect the newspapers were kept secret but each had a codeword by which they could be recognised . Those who came regularly were easily recognised by sight but no one ever knew their names . It was just too dangerous knowing too much about other people while doing this work and could have led to all kinds of trouble . If ever a member of the group was arrested all incriminating material had to be burnt and work ceased for a day or two so as not to endanger anyone else . This never happened in the group that Mrs van I. belonged to . Her work continued night after night . In October 1942 the doorbell rang in the middle of the night at Mrs van I flat in Keizersgracht/CAMP where this work was being carried out . On seeing German and Dutch SS soldiers outside they refused to open the door but instead set about burning all the illegal material in the oven . There was a built in hiding place in the wall where stencil machines cardboard oil and explosive substances were kept . After 45 minutes the Nazis had managed to get through the neighbouring garden and flat and into their house breaking the door down to gain entry . The head of the security services himself a man by the name of Lages arrested them there was no chance to hide because the roof the garden and the house were all surrounded by SS men . All three of the women there were taken away . The SS stayed in the flat for five days and nights hoping to catch more perpetrators but no one came . They went right through the flat searching every nook and cranny and ripping up the floor but found nothing . They completely missed the real hiding place and when Mrs van I. returned home after the war she found the materials and equipment still there untouched . The reason the SS spent so much time searching the premises was because they were convinced this was the place where illegal communications were being produced . A man who had come regularly to collect newspapers from Mrs van I. which he used to distribute on trains travelling into Germany/GPE had been captured by the Germans and interrogated . He had denounced all 29 members of the group which was why suspicion had fallen on Mrs van I house . When the SS failed to find anything incriminating they assumed the premises had just been used as some kind of halfway house . The women were taken away by car with an armed SS guard to the security service headquarters in Euterpestrasse/STREET . A woman called Mrs Riek Suel and a man called Mr Jo Elsendoorn were in the same car both 4 accused of buying the illegal newspaper . That night they were put into individual cells at Euterpestrasse/STREET . The following day the interrogation began nobody confessed to anything . They were then taken to Amstelveensche Weg prison and locked in the cells there . They stayed there until the end of June 1943 . During this period they were interrogated eight times . These interrogations always took place in Euterpestrasse/STREET . The fourth time Mrs van I. was questioned Lages showed her a stencil machine and said We found this in your flat . Mrs van I immediately recognised the machine as hers but it was one that she had used for some time and had given away . She and the two other women stuck firmly to their statement that this could not have been found in their flat . So adamant were they in their testimony that the SS ended up believing that in fact no printing had taken place in their flat but that it had merely been used as a halfway house . Had they not believed this the women would have been shot right there and then . For the fifth interrogation Mrs van I. was taken to Wetering Schans prison escorted there by a special division . On arrival she was put into a wooden lock up resembling an upright coffin . They then brought her face to face with the man who had betrayed her . The interrogation lasted a whole day . When asked Do you know this man ? her reply was always No . The informer however maintained that he knew Mrs van I. and again told in detail of the illegal work in which she had been involved . But Mrs I. remained steadfast and confessed nothing . She was taken back to Amstelveenscher Weg prison but was not locked up with the other women . Instead she was put in a punishment cell – a two and a half metre square barred cage down in the cellar . There were even bars above her head . The only furniture in the cell was a wooden plank bed . She was forced to hand over her jacket and long trousers . She sat there in pitch darkness all day long and then at night under glaringly bright lights . She was given a sack of straw to sleep on but no blanket to cover herself and was unable to sleep anyway because of the lights . Marking time by the church clock she walked round and round her cell changing direction every half an hour . She spent three days and nights incarcerated there just walking round and round . 5 On the fourth day they brought her back to Euterpestrasse/STREET . Yet again she was asked if she knew the informer . She repeatedly denied that she did . They threatened to shoot her still she confessed nothing . As they already had her imprisoned she felt emboldened to say to the SS men You never going to win this war you know . She was then taken back to her old cell in Amstelveenschen Weg prison . In subsequent interrogations too she was asked repeatedly whether she knew this or that person but their questioning was pointless as she steadfastly refused to reveal anything . One of the Dutch SS men tried to get her to talk by putting all the blame on the Jews . Of course that didn‘t work either . In January 1943 she was given more freedom and was allowed out to clean the prison corridors and distribute food . Her cell was not locked during the day only at night time . This meant she was able to go into the other cells . Amongst the other inmates there were a large number of students who had been caught distributing ration cards stolen from the local registration office . When prisoners returned in the evening after being interrogated they would write down any news or information they had gleaned during the day on small pieces of paper and Mrs van I. would take these from cell to cell so that people were kept abreast of anything new . She also passed letters to the prisoners through the hatch in their door . Then someone betrayed her and she was summoned to the camp commandant for questioning . She never told them where the letters had come from claiming she had found them under a mat . As nothing could be proved she was allowed to go . A Jew by the name of de Groot asked Mrs van I. to smuggle a letter out to his family . He wanted to warn them that they were in danger and should take their weapons and go into hiding . Mrs van I. promised to take the letter . Every fortnight families were allowed to come and collect the prisoners ‘ dirty linen and clothing for washing . So it was that she managed to smuggle this letter through despite the bundle of washing being searched by a female prison guard . Mrs van I. would sew the letters into the seams hems and shoulder pads of laundry items . Once again she was betrayed – this time by her Christian cellmates . 6 A further interrogation was carried out . Once again she was sent to the punishment barracks for a day . She continued to deny everything and as it was impossible to prove her ‘ crime ‘ she was released . The others involved were saved as a result . During the night Jews were transported to Westerbork/GPE transit camp . It was Mrs van I.‘s job to leave the bags that these people were going to take with them outside their doors . One of the women who was to be deported gave her 10 guilders as a thank you gift as she left . At the start of June 1943 the prison was so crowded that many of the inmates were sent to Vught/CAMP concentration camp . Once the command realised they were not going to get any new information out of Mrs van I. she too was sent to Vught . There were some people very few of them Christian who accepted huge sums of money for hiding Jews . For them it was a good way to make some cash . But if they got caught they complained bitterly about getting locked up for helping filthy Jews . Mrs van I. number at the Vught camp was l67 . While there she worked in the Philips workshop . Of the civilan workforce by no means all were Nazis . Many offered their help for example by smuggling letters to them from Westerbork/CAMP even those that had to be taken to  Amsterdam/GPE prison . While in Vught/LOC the Christians also received parcels from both their relatives and the Red Cross . The Jews were allowed neither . Mrs van I. recalls a tragic event that took place in February 1944 . Two women were standing out on the parade ground – one of them was Mrs Jedzini a German prisoner with definite Nazi sympathies and the other a Dutch woman . The latter was telling everyone that she had managed to carry on working illegally and hiding Jews . Quite by chance this Dutch woman was then released that same day whereupon Mrs Jedzini – no one knew why she had originally been arrested – went straight to the camp commander to complain about the fact that she a German had not been released while someone who was still hiding Jews had been allowed to go home . 7 Mrs Jedzini behaviour enraged the other women they beat her and refused to let her sleep in the barracks that night . Mrs Jedzini used this ill treatment to her advantage and complained to the commander the following day . The other prisoners were at work in the Philips workshop until the evening except for one girl . In retaliation for the way she had been treated Mrs Jedzini cut off this girl hair . Once again she used this incident to complain to the commandant . After that the other inmates hurled such violent abuse at her that she feared for her life and tried to escape . She ran to the barbed wire fence and was shot by one of the guards . The bullet pierced her lung and she died in hospital a few days later . That afternoon the girl was sent to the Bunker as the prison block at Vught/LOC was known . There she was questioned about which of the other prisoners had been involved in ill treating Mrs Jedzini she said nothing . The whole block came forward en masse to say that they had all been involved in what had happened . The result was that all 92 women were taken to the prison block and put into one cell measuring just two by three metres . The block had only recently been built . The walls and the nitric acid that had been used during their construction were not yet dry . The windows could not be opened . The women were so tightly crammed together that their oxygen supply was soon depleted . As the vapour rose from their bodies so nitric acid dripped down on them burning the skin on their faces heads and bodies . When the chief prison guard a German woman opened the cell the following morning the cloud of vapour that issued forth was so great that she slammed the door shut again and went to fetch the commandant . When they both returned the prisoners were released having spent from 6 pm the previous evening until 8 am that morning confined in that tiny space . Fifteen of the prisoners had died others had fainted . Mrs van I. tried to revive them with artificial respiration . An SS doctor was called . He followed his instincts as a doctor rather than as a good Nazi and tried to help the women by 8 tering injections . All the women were now taken to other cells in the prison block this time no more than 2 or 3 prisoners to a cell . They were given food and straw to sleep on . After four days they were forced to testify that they were guilty of mutiny this was their only chance of being released . They were taken back to the barracks under cover of darkness so that no one could see what sort of state they were in . That same day the doctor flew back to Berlin/GPE and reported the camp commander a few days later that same commander was sent to the/LOC Eastern/LOC Front/LOC . The girl around whom the whole incident had erupted was kept in prison and there she stayed until June 1944 . Accused of fomenting the disturbances she was then returned to the camp for a couple of days before being sent to Ravensbrück/CAMP . Mrs van Ipern was not the only one driven to collapse by these terrible events and was hospitalised for a fortnight . Even today her ability to work is severely hampered as a result of this and other wartime experiences . All the women continued working in the Philips workshop . In September 1944 further transports of Jewish prisoners arrived in Vught/LOC from other camps . The rumble of cannonfire could be heard in the distance and Dutch Nazis were fleeing to Germany/GPE with their families . On 5 September many of the younger prisoners were shot as political criminals . On 6 September the entire camp was evacuated . Prisoners were allowed to take two blankets and some food with them . Mrs van I. was loaded into a cattle truck along with 80 other women . As they travelled through Holland/GPE the doors were opened at each station and they were given water . Once they reached the German border the doors remained closed they were given nothing more to eat or drink and were given no access to toilet facilities . They travelled like this for two days and nights . On 9 September they arrived in Fürstenberg/CAMP from there they had to walk to Ravensbrück/CAMP . On arrival they were made to stand out in the open for a further two days and nights . The only food they had during this time was any bread they had left 9 over from the train journey . They were given nothing else to eat or drink . As the floor of the camp was covered with coal dust it was long before the women were completely black including their eyes . The dust caused many of them to contract TB . At the end of the two days and nights they were registered and given numbers – Mrs van I was . She was registered during the night and then taken to the washhouse where all her clothes were removed . In return she was given a lice infested vest and a thin dress – not a prison dress but an ordinary civilian dress with a cross sewn on the back . She was given neither shoes nor underclothes . On the rare occasions when the showers worked the water came out ice cold . In the dormitory barracks eleven women had to share a bed that was only really big enough for three . They had only a layer of wood shavings as a mattress and these too were crawling with lice . They slept in three tiered bunks . The whole camp was infested with vermin . Mrs van I. stayed here until the end of April throughout this whole time she was given neither soap a towel nor fresh clothing . One of the other inmates gave her some old underwear and 2 odd socks . After a week the Philips people were selected to go and work for Siemens . The working day ran from 7 am to 7 pm with 45 minutes for lunch . Their food ration consisted of half a litre of hot water with potato peelings or water with caraway seeds or turnips . They were taken out in columns to exercise . The barracks that Mrs van I. occupied was designed for 300 people but actually accommodated women . Of the five toilets only one worked . So they were forced to ‘ do their business ‘ outside the barracks which meant people had to walk through the mess . The prison guards often came at 2 in the morning and beat the women with long leather whips . They were then made to stand out on the parade ground until 7 in the morning even in snow and rain . Not having any shoes Mrs van I. improvised by tying two pieces of wood to her feet with cord . She worked in the Nickelei department at Siemens chromium plating aircraft parts . The atmosphere was toxic so 10 they were given an extra ration of half a litre of milk per day . Mrs van I. gave hers to a woman who was very severely malnourished . The acid in the material they were working with corroded their clothing and before long it was full of holes . In January 1945 the temperature had dropped to minus 28 degrees . Mrs van I. managed to get her hands on a pullover in exchange for four slices of bread . There was no ‘ pulling together ‘ among the prisoners . People did help each other everything had to be bought . Towards the end of the war the work at Siemens came to an end and Mrs van I. returned to the main camp . Knowing the physical toll it took on the women involved she had no desire to be sent to work at the quarry . She managed to avoid it by hiding in her friend Hilde Sternberg bed . She turned up at the roll call and was counted . But then a bit later when the women were being lined up ready to go to work she found a better hiding place . Mrs Sternberg slept in the top bunk and one of the planks in the ceiling above the bed had come loose . Mrs van I. crawled inside whenever the guard came along and started lashing the empty beds with her whip to see if anyone was hiding there . From Ravensbrück/CAMP Mrs van I. returned home to Holland/GPE via Sweden/GPE . Having shared the final part of her ordeal and endured the same experiences as Hilde Sternberg Mrs van I. recommends that people also read her friend account of the events described here . Mrs van I. who now lives in  Amsterdam/GPE was very sick for two full years following the end of the war . 
author lived in Berlin/GPE throughout the Hitler period hidden by Gräfin von Maltzan whom he later married . His mother was deported to Theresienstadt/GHETTO in 1942 . She died later in the same year at Auschwitz/CAMP . Maria von Maltzan was well known in the circles of the underground movement . She helped organising the escape of sixty Jews to Scandinavia/LOC . She gave a number of people asylum in her tiny flat . She was denounced at one time by a Mrs Milan . The Jewish Gestapo agent Isaacsohn and his wife Stella Goldschlag Kuebler were concerned in this incident . She was kept under close watch by the Gestapo until a Mr Hoffmann a high ranking police officer went to her assistance . During the last days of the war Mrs von Maltzan also offered hospitality to a great number of deserters from the German Forces . Illegal Life in Berlin/GPE At the time when Hitler rose to power I was still employed in a leading role in commerce . I was permitted to pursue my profession without any constraints up until 1938 . My contract was terminated without notice in November 1938 . My emigration to England/GPE which I had planned jointly with my mother ran into considerable difficulties mostly due to unforeseen personal circumstances . We therefore had to remain in Berlin/GPE . In 1939 I undertook a retraining course in metal analysis and then worked in the laboratories of a certain Dr Lewin . Dr Lewin a leading authority in the field of metal analysis was forced to close his laboratories in 1940 because of his racial background . In 1941 I came down with polymeritis . At the same time I was affected by one of the catastrophic evictions . Back then all houses that ceased to be in the possession of their Jewish owners from a certain closing date onwards would need to immediately be cleared of all of their remaining Jewish residents as well . The eviction notes were distributed by Jewish congregations at the direct orders of the Nazis . We then received an apartment on the premises of a Jewish landlord on Konstanzerstraße/STREET . In 1942 a chain of unfortunate events led to the deportation of my mother 2 to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . The pretext for my mother deportation was that the Star of David on her chest had been covered in parts by her fur boa . In September 1942 my mother was forced to conclude her life in Auschwitz/CAMP . All these events eventually persuaded me to go underground . I moved in with my Aryan fiancé the Countess Maria von Maltzan who later became my wife . At this time she still occupied a small two bedroom apartment built into a former ground floor shop on Detmolderstraße/STREET . Countess von Maltzan was not an unknown figure in the underground movement . Although she was a Protestant she had become the closest confidante and associate of Father Muckermann in Munich/GPE . There she also obtained a Ph.D. in the natural sciences . When she began to feel the heat in Munich/GPE she left the city for Berlin/GPE . In Berlin/GPE in 1939 she was conscripted into the ranks of the Foreign Ministry mostly because of her excellent command of several foreign languages . Shortly thereafter she was transferred to the Red Cross search services as her anti Nazi convictions had made it impossible for her to further be employed by the Foreign Ministry . Once again my wife took up studies in her spare time this time to complete a doctoral degree in veterinary medicine . I stayed at her place for three quarters of a year without being allowed to leave the flat even just once . At this time my wife and I both lived off of her ration cards . My activities were limited to keeping our household in good order to the best of my abilities . Later my wife managed to get an editing job at a theatrical publisher . I did this work for her . My wife dedicated her days to her studies and her nights to those who were persecuted by the Nazis . In close cooperation with Swedish churches she succeeded in moving 60 people across the Scandinavian borders removing them effectively from the reach of the Nazis . One day we had Jewish writer and resistance fighter Georg Zavier visit us at our apartment . He asked whether we would be able to give shelter to a young Jewish nurse by the name of Luise Ehrenreich . Luise Ehrenreich was meant to be transported to Auschwitz/CAMP . At night she arrived at ours . Equipped with FALSE papers and a Red Cross nurse uniform she was supposed to pass over the Swiss border . In Baden/LOC bei/LOC Wien/LOC she was arrested by SS patrol guards 3 and transported back to Berlin/GPE . From Berlin/GPE she was sent on to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . Nothing is known about her fate . Nazi terror increased in step with the intensification of allied air raids . This meant that more of the men and women who had been involved in anti Nazi work had to go underground . And that is how our two bedroom flat eventually became a kind of mass asylum . The radiologist Dr Bothe Holländer came first . After him there came my former colleague Günther Herschel and then the chemist Willi Buschhoff . Frau Dr Lotte Bamberg a former classmate of my wife moved in with us as well . She had also endangered herself by working for the resistance movement . At around the same time my wife had already started working as a veterinarian at a local animal welfare organisation . She also received many visitors in private consultation hours so that it became exceedingly difficult for external observers to decide who actually lived on the premises and who came only to visit . In the autumn of 1945 we were bombed out . Our fellows from the resistance had to move into different quarters . Only Dr Bothe Holländer and I stayed behind at the flat . With our dogs in our backpacks we went looking for a suitable room . We found one in the apartment of the widow of writer Emil Milan . In the meantime my wife had a wall erected in place of the shopfront which fixed our flat up to a certain degree and made it somewhat inhabitable again . Now however the flat was left with only one exit out onto the courtyard . We moved back in . In October 1943 my wife was denounced by Frau Milan who told the authorities that my wife had given shelter to Jews . Frau Milan who had herself been anonymously denounced believed to be able to exonerate herself by sharing this information with the police . The concierge warned us as she had found a note in the hallway reading At Countess Maltzan there are J ! Jews . This note had seemingly been dropped by a Gestapo officer . Dr Bothe Holländer had to move into a different accommodation immediately whereas I remained with my wife . A few days later the Gestapo arrived . 4 Thanks to a clever diversionary maneuver by my wife we were able to distract the officers attention for a few seconds so that I had enough time to climb into the bedstead of our couch which had been prepared especially for this purpose . The bedstead had several unobtrusive air holes in it and its lid could be closed so firmly from the inside that not a single gap gave away the hollow space that lay underneath . The search lasted for four hours . As my wife recalled later the notorious Jewish Gestapo officer Isaacsohn was present at the operation . His wife Stella Goldschlag who had denounced many a Jew to the Nazis and thereby caused their arrests stood waiting at the front door . The house search did not suffice to have my wife cleared of the charges levelled against her by the Gestapo . In a ruined building opposite our house they deployed a permanent observer who took note of all people who entered our flat and spied on our guests with binoculars . The Gestapo attempted further to determine how many people were staying in our flat with the assistance of very sensitive wiretaps . A count of all breaths recorded in the flat at night was supposed to reveal the actual number of occupants . This type of surveillance failed however because in our flat there were also many injured animals which do after all breathe rather loudly as well . At night the Gestapo sent spies to peek through the windows of our flat . Eavesdropping at the door also belonged to the many types of surveillance employed against us . The head of the Außendienst of Police Department 155 Hoffmann hated the Nazis and was quite blunt about his convictions . My wife told him about the measures employed by the Gestapo . When one night somebody was fiddling with our windows again my wife decided to call the police . Hoffman and his officers arrived promptly to arrest the alleged burglar . Hoffmann pretended to be quite astonished when it became clear that the arrested men were his colleagues from the Political Department . From this point onward they left us in peace . During the final days of the battle of Berlin/GPE our house once more filled up with deserters of all military types and formations . They had received our address from other members of the resistance who had been organising for the resistance movement within the fighting troops . The exciting period of our life came to an end with the Soviet invasion of Berlin/GPE . 
World War II the author was a member of the military government in Zloczoe/GPE Poland/GPE . He lived with his family in a small flat and when his rejection of the Nazi doctrine was soon found out Poles and Jews came to him for help . Among his protégés was a Jewish lawyer Dr. Altmann and they frequently exchanged views and information . In May 1943 when the situation for Jews became critical they worked out a plan how to save Mrs Altmann . As she did not look Jewish she was supplied with forged papers and sent with another Jewess in the author official car to Lemberg/LOC . Under the guise of an Aryan she could buy a railway ticket there and proceed to Warsaw/GPE where she took a domestic job . In careful and lengthy negotiations a hiding place was then arranged for Dr. Altmann his son and his father . A small farmer nearby agreed to give them shelter and in return the author as a member of the Food Department of the Government obtained the permit for him to run a snack bar . He could thus allocate extra rations for him with which to feed Dr. Altmann and his family . On 14 July 1943 the author took leave of Dr. Altmann . A few days later a particularly brutal aktion took place in the course of which fighting broke out and a few Germans were shot . Upon repeated requests of Dr. Altmann the author went to see him one Sunday morning in August 1943 . He pretended that his car had broken down and called for help at the snack bar . The farmer asked him into his own room where he met the sadly changed Dr. Altmann . Together they went down into the stable which housed 3 cows . Under the trough was a small hole through which the men had to crawl into a tiny windowless space . A small drawing attached to the document explains the lay out . The news that Dr. Altmann survived was given to the author by another Jew Joseph Batisgh whom author had taken into his house as a servant on the recommendation of Dr. Altmann . Mr Batisgh was an accountant by profession and friendly relations between him and the author family were soon established . Whenever danger threatened Mr Batisgh and other Jews spent the nights in the author kitchen but when Zloczow was declared Judenfrei in July 1943 it was decided that Mr Batisgh and his wife had to go underground They found foster parents for their small child who however died 6 months later . The young couple went to stay with a Polish farmer in a village nearby . For more than a year they lived in a camouflaged potato camp until the Russians arrived . In 1946 the author heard from Mr Batisch that they had survived . In his concluding remarks the author explains that his Catholic faith and abhorrence of the Nazi crimes made him act as he did . Remarks . The author was traced by the Wiener Library following a short note in the Süddeutsche Zeitung Munich/GPE 19 December 1957 describing his attitude during the war . The Rescue of Two Jewish Families by a German Civil Servant in Poland/GPE During the war I was employed by the Generalgouvernement the German administered part of Poland/GPE during World War II at the department for Food and Agriculture and came to Zloczow/LOC in Galicia/LOC from November 1941 where the District Office was headquartered . My job was to record and distribute the agricultural products and to monitor all operations associated with food . When I first came to Zloczow/LOC I had a small room in the home of a Ukrainian cleric and after several weeks I was assigned a small flat by the District Office giving me the opportunity to have my family visit me temporarily from the Reich/LOC . I had only been in Zloczow/LOC for a few weeks when I was approached by Polish as well as Jewish circles mostly academics as far as these still existed who soon found out that I was somewhat different to the other Germans and had kept a clear view with regard to politics . It was a Dr. Altmann who came to visit me often concerning all kinds of pleas and concerns . I provided help as far as was possible . In some instances I had to be extremely careful in doing so as a { the } Gestapo was also present in Zloczow/LOC who had already put me on the black list due to an encounter before the war . It was Dr. Altmann who recommended Josef Batisch to me as a housekeeper . As I had my family join me in January 1942 I was very grateful for this service . Batisch who was about 28 years old back then turned out to be a very pleasant and highly respectable character to whom I could entrust my two 2 children 2 girls aged 9 and 11 without hesitation . We developed a relationship as is only possible in a healthy family environment . B. who was an accountant by trade felt safe and comfortable in our home as he knew he was living with a German family who had the necessary understanding for his situation . My children were and still are very attached to their Josef who now lives in Denver/LOC Colorado/LOC USA/LOC . It was therefore very hard for our family when Mr. Batisch could no longer stay with us because of being a Jew and had to leave us in the summer of 1943 to go underground . I still remember today how I discussed all options with Mr. Batisch in particular how we could stay in contact and should we survive the war and the Third Reich we promised each other to meet again afterwards . So Mr. Batisch had my home address which he actually used later when he sent the first sign of life in 1946 from Bad Gastein/LOC in Austria/GPE . Naturally for my children who had been raised with the Christian Catholic faith there was no place for the Nazi ideology . Even the lessons at school could not convince them ultimately it was just the understanding and opinion of their father that mattered to them . No teacher at the school could change that . However they were smart enough not to compromise their parents at school . It is this attitude which helps to understand why my children did not see Mr. Batisch the Jew but Josef the person who protected them from the outside world as much as they were his faithful friends and advocates at home . In the spring of 1943 the so called actions against Jews started 3 in Zloczow/LOC . One of them took place on 2 April 1943 . If such a danger presented Mr. Batisch did not go home as usual but he stayed and slept in our kitchen . During these actions which took place several times throughout the next few months and were always unannounced my flat was always the refuge for several Jewish families . If I was being visited by colleagues or other Germans at the time our protégées disappeared in the cellar and adjacent rooms of course whereby my children were always most worried about their Josef . In July 1943 the time came when Zloczow/LOC was declared as clean of Jews which means that anyone was entitled to shoot a Jew on the spot if he came across one . Such cases did really occur . We now had to see how we could help our protégées over this horrific time . For with the ever closer approach of the front the day would come when my family would have to return to the Old/LOC Reich/LOC just as the civil administration would be forced to move away one day . Consequently it was important to find a way which was safe enough for our protégées during the transition period as well as with the arrival of the front . We came to the conclusion to seek refuge in the countryside . Josef Batisch and his wife found shelter with a Polish farmer in Remizowce/LOC about 10 km south of Zloczow/LOC after having handed their one year old baby to a farmer for fostering where it died unfortunately after six months . You have to imagine the pain a young woman will feel when being separated from her own child like that . But 4 under the given circumstances it was a desperate need to hand the child to foster parents so as not to risk to be caught out by the child crying . Josef Batisch lived with his wife in a camouflaged potato clamp about 30 m from the farm from July 1943 until the arrival of the Russian troops in July 1944 . So Mr. Batisch and his wife had to live in the most difficult circumstances for a whole year . We stayed in touch of course but had to be extremely careful indeed and just verbally through the farmer himself . He reported back to me about Mr. Batisch as he brought food and medication to them from me . In the middle of 1944 I left Zloczow/LOC with the civil administration after the German women and children had already returned to the Reich/LOC in January . Mr. Batisch now had to fend for himself and until the Russian troops arrived this must have been the most difficult underground existence for him and his wife . Sure before I left I provided Mr. Batisch and his wife with all kinds of things . I returned to Krakow/GPE and had lost our connection . It was only in 1946 that Mr. Batisch sent message to my home address in Nuremberg/LOC from Bad Gastein/LOC in Austria/GPE about his rescue . I would have very much liked to have Mr. Batisch and his wife whose health had suffered greatly and who are still not fully recovered today join my family where they would have found far greater and more favourable care for their health than in Austria/GPE in foreign Bad/GPE Gastein/GPE for sure but 5 the regulations of the occupying allied forces in those days were more than strange and despite my greatest efforts with the competent occupation authorities a correspondence with Austria/GPE was not permitted . Before Mr. Batisch left for America/GPE with his wife in 1947 he now lives in Denver/LOC Colorado/LOC we were able to meet twice namely at the border by Bayerisch Gmain near Berchtesgaden/LOC in Germany/GPE which was prohibited . I succeeded with another rescue from the claws of the henchmen with the family of Dr. Altmann . Dr. Altmann was a lawyer and lived with his family wife 10 year old son and 65 year old father in Zloczow/LOC . Dr. Altmann visited my flat frequently and discreetly . He kept me up to date about local occurrences and I in turn told him about any actions against Jews that were to be expected as much as I knew about these . When the situation for the Jewish population became ever more critical in May 1943 and their total extermination had to be expected seriously we deliberated together how a rescue could be possible . We sat together for many hours and hatched all sorts of possible and impossible plans . First of all the wife of Dr. Altmann had to be brought to safety . As a woman she had already made the future situation which was only set to become worse even more difficult . Finding shelter for Mrs. Altmann was not too big a problem as she did not look Jewish and could easily pass as an Aryan with her blonde hair in an area where nobody knew her . It was decided to bring her to Warsaw/GPE as going into hiding was easier and less risky in a big city . Already on 29 May 1943 Mrs. Altmann and another 6 Jewish woman were driven to Lemberg/LOC which was 80 km away by my Polish chauffeur in a company car . Travelling by train was generally forbidden for Jews and not possible either as Mrs. Altmann was a well known personality in Zloczow/LOC and would have been easily recognised at Zloczow/LOC train station . So we had no other option and had to take the risk of travelling in my company car . From Lemberg/LOC Mrs. Altmann travelled to Warsaw/GPE with a fake passport and took up a position there . So the lady was safe for now . After careful consideration of all circumstances Dr. Altmann decided to negotiate with a reliable Polish small farmer he knew in Jeleohowice/LOC about 2 to 3 km from Zloczow/LOC whose small property was situated directly on the road between Zloczow/LOC and Brody/LOC . We agreed that the farmer would be given permission to run a small breakfast bar approved by the Food Department I was working for which was reasonable as the property was located favourably on a busy through road to Brody/LOC . This way the owner of the breakfast bar was automatically assigned a certain amount of food every month determined by me which of course benefitted Dr. Altmann and his family and the farmer himself also received some for his willingness to help . I also applied for the official permission to run a breakfast bar in case I was moved away from Zloczow/LOC so that Dr. Altmann and his family would still be catered for with regard to food . Dr. Altmann visited me in my flat for the last time on 14 July 1943 . It was high time for him 7 to go into hiding in his hiding place . As he had stayed longer this evening than the curfew imposed on Jews I accompanied him home at 10 pm that night to ensure his safe return . It was hard for both of us to say goodbye . The fact that we had chosen the right time for Dr. Altmann to disappear was confirmed by the radical actions against Jews that started on 20 July which were performed with unprecedented cruelty . The Jews that had stayed behind in Zloczow/LOC finally gathered and shot back on 22 July . A proportion of them barricaded themselves in the attic of the Zloczow/LOC town hall as well as adjacent houses . There was considerable gunfire on 27 and 28 July 1943 and the German police also had to accept some losses . The gunfire only ceased on 29 July . In the meantime Dr. Altmann sent word to me through his Polish host in several letters which of course did not mention any name . Amongst others Dr. Altmann asked for an allowance of alcohol . I I sent him some bottles of vodka which of course were not for him to drink but were for medical as well as hygienic purposes and as I will detail further below were of enormous use to him and his family . His need was completely understandable to me . He confirmed receipt very soon . Unfortunately I was not able to keep these letters from him as I myself did not feel safe from the Gestapo and therefore destroyed all correspondence immediately . Dr. Altmann asked me several times to visit him in his shelter . I hesitated first of all as this posed a significant risk to me . I only agreed to visit him on Sunday 8 August 1943 after giving this some careful thought and after being 8 repeatedly urged by him . I let him know that I would visit him in the morning while the family of the Polish farmer was in church . I drove to the near Jelechowice/LOC around 9 am in my company car unaccompanied and without chauffeur . I stopped in front of the house of the supposed breakfast bar opened the bonnet and started tampering with the cooler of the car pretending to need some water for it . I entered the house where the farmer was already waiting for me greeted me in hushed whispers and led me to his parlour ceremoniously where he asked me to take a seat . He then disappeared immediately and left me on my own . I listened tensely and did not hear the slightest sound in the house . Waiting for further things to happen I saw how the door was opened after a short time and Dr. Altmann appeared dressed in a nightgown barefoot in light sandals . The farmer retreated and left us alone . I was quite shocked by the sight of Dr. Altmann who approached me pale and looking like a ghost and held out his hand to me . The greeting was accordingly the impression it left on me inextinguishable so that a flowing conversation was impossible . At the end of the conversation Dr. Altmann asked me to come with him downstairs so that I could see his hideout and see for myself the conditions him and his 65 year old father and 10 year old son had to endure . He led the way and guided me down small wooden stairs at which end he opened a door and we entered a stable which housed three cows . To gain a better impression I am attaching a drawing showing a cross section of how and where Dr. Altmann and his family were sheltered . 9 The floor plan of the stable might have been 6 x 4 m. Dr. Altmann showed me a hole in the brickwork below the feed trough in the cattle box sized about 40/30 cm leading to a hidden room of about 3 4 m2 and a height of approx . 1.5 m. A room where you could neither stand up straight nor stretch out with stuffy air and not a single ray of light . They had to endure these conditions until the front arrived . As we stood together in the stable Dr. Altmann pointed to an ashlar rock lying below the feeding rack amongst the cows which would be inserted into the brickwork by the farmer in case of danger . Only blankets were used in the hideout on which they could sit and lie . Furthermore there was a bucket for human needs onto which a small tabletop was placed when the farmer handed food through the hole . The room could only be left by its occupants in the middle of the night to breathe some stable air or at best to get some fresh air in the farmyard . But even there utmost care had to be taken . Now it becomes clear why alcohol was asked for to wash and maintain a scanty level of hygiene . 10 The farmer was reliable as well did not let his family in on the secret at least not his children to prevent any type of betrayal . He would also place the ashlar rock back in the brickwork very carefully as soon as Dr. Altmann had gone back in . My farewell from Dr. Altmann whom I had seen for the last time on this occasion was more than moving . I could barely believe that people could exist in these conditions for a whole year . This only seems possible if those concerned have strong confidence and a firm hope of being saved . Needless to say that this experience affected me greatly emotionally and adding to this burden was the fact that I was not able to share any of my concerns with those around me . Mr. Batisch whom I met in secret in 1946 and again in 1947 at the Bavarian Austrian border the occupying allied forces had stopped and prohibited any communication with Austria/GPE ! told me that Dr. Altmann had survived the war and was living in the east . I have not yet been able to establish contact with him . These lines might help to open up the chance of sending some sign of life . My explanations of the events portrayed are partially based on my memory which has remained clear despite the long period that has passed since which does seem understandable as such experiences are unique and will therefore stay with a person forever . However my diary also provided valuable information in particular 11 with regard to dates . Even though I kept a meticulous diary during the war I was only able to record a rough outline of these events for obvious reasons of my own safety . However these were sufficient for me to provide a reliable timeline . Finally all this begs the question what my reasons might have been to take such an enormous risk for myself as well as my family and offer my help to rescue these creatures who had been dealt such a heavy hand by destiny . Asking this question demands an answer at the same time . While I was often horrified at home even before the war by the injustice in many areas and the sheer brutality of the Nazi ideology this can not be compared to what I then had to experience during the war in the east . The more nastiness and savagery I saw the Polish population subjected to by the SS as well as the civil administration the more I felt the urge to help those that were suffering . Despite the great victories gained by Hitler I was absolutely certain that the day would come when justice would triumph over injustice . By getting involved personally to help those in need I believed to best serve my fatherland as the world had to realise one day that there was another side to Germany/GPE as well . My religious belief also helped me in my doing . If these lines help to heal the wounds 12 we have inflicted on the Jewish people most of all I feel great satisfaction and am glad that my actions at the time have somewhat contributed to an emerging communication . 
19 March 1944 the Nazis occupied Budapest/GPE and after a very short time the terror of chasing looting humiliating the Jewish population was spread all over Hungary/GPE . The authoress lived at Pécs/GPE a town with a community of Jews p.1 . Together with her husband and their eighteen year old son she had to move into a small kitchen at the Ghetto but soon all men had to join labour companies and the rest of the Hungarian Jews apart from those at Budapest/GPE were evacuated by rail to destinations unknown p.2 . The Pécs/GHETTO Ghetto was the last to be emptied 7 July 1944 . Brutal ill treatment horrible conditions on transport doors opened only once in three days and two nights in order to take out the corpses p.2 3 . Atrocious proceedings at arrival at Auschwitz/CAMP p.3 6 . Appalling conditions of life p.5 . Arrival at Auschwitz/CAMP of a great number of Christian Poles most of whom were gassed p.6 . Transport to Ravensbruck/CAMP p.6 and on to a small Labour Camp at Reinickendorf/CAMP near Berlin/GPE work at Argus aircraft factory until the end of January 1945 . Digging trenches frost starvation nutrition edema atrocities p.7 cruel punishment p.8 . In April 1945 confusion started to be obvious . March to Oranienburg/CAMP KZ/CAMP already in a chaotic state p.3 9 . Escape & amp liberation p.7 . Three months at a Russian quarantine camp at Landsberg/CAMP p.9 . In August back to Pécs reunited with husband & amp son . The family left Hungary/GPE in October 1956 the authoress & amp her husband have jobs in London/GPE their son lives abroad . 9 . Further References Mohacs/LOC and Szigetvar/LOC towns in . B Lager Auschwitz/CAMP p.4 6 . Dr. Mengele p.4 . Selections p.4 5 . Roll calls p.5 7 . Brutish Polish women as Kapos p.5 6 . Liquidation of the Gypsies p.5 . An English translation of this testimony is not yet available . The Wiener Library is reliant on a team of volunteer translators to translate this collection of eyewitness testimonies from the 1950s . If you are highly competent in written German and English and would like to help in this regard please contact our Volunteer Coordinator at translation@wienerlibrary.co.uk . Click here to read more about this project . Auschwitz/CAMP Ravensbrück/CAMP and Reinickendorf/CAMP . The experiences of a Hungarian Jewess 1944 1945 . During the war I lived with my husband and my son in the Southern Hungarian city of Pecs/LOC German name Fuenfkirchen/LOC . However when the Germans occupied Hungary/GPE on the 19th of March 1944 I was staying for a short time in the capital Budapest/GPE with my son who at that time was 18 years old . We succeeded with difficulty and hardship in returning home . All of the stations were already keenly watched the police conducted a real manhunt for Jews who wanted to travel to Budapest/GPE or to leave it . At the entrance to the station a policeman let me pass but caught my son by the arm and wanted to take him away . I began to scream and cry and begged the policemen to let my boy go free . The man certainly had a bit of human feeling and after a long to ing and fro ing he finally let us both pass . Arriving in Pecs/LOC we found everything there was still peaceful but after a few days even there as in all parts of the country there was a regime of terror . All Jews had to wear the yellow star from the 4th of April onwards and from then on new special laws against the Jews appeared almost daily . They had to hand in their valuable objects their jewellery and their radios their wealth was confiscated and Jewish businesses closed . Pecs had a large Jewish community of around and also a considerable number of Jews lived in the small villages that surrounded the city . They were all now drawn into the maelstrom of destruction . The order came at the beginning of May that in Pecs/LOC as in all of the other Hungarian cities with the exception of Budapest/GPE the Jews had to give up their residences and move into a ghetto . Each person was allowed to take 50 kilogram of luggage with them . The ghetto in Pecs/LOC was created in a suburban area outside of the city . The Christian residents who lived there were evacuated and were assigned better residences . By contrast the Jews were herded together into small rooms . We were able to count ourselves lucky that we three were allocated the kitchen of a small house in this ghetto area . Others were sandwiched much more tightly into small rooms . 2 – In the first days my husband who had a leading position in a large industrial company still went to work . Though this soon stopped . The entire ghetto area was cordoned off . It was guarded by the police and the gendarmerie . New transports of Jews from the neighbouring localities and also from the city of Mohacs/LOC were herded in . The crowding became increasingly unbearable . Then came the conscription of the men for forced labour . The conscription order was delivered to the ghetto . My husband went to a forced labour company in Szigetvar/LOC and my son to one in Mohacs/LOC . With this the entire family was riven asunder . We women had to carry out garden work around the ghetto area . When I returned in the evenings tired from the work to the small kitchen room I found now and then a hurriedly scribbled message from my husband or my son tucked into the door . Someone from the labour company had smuggled it through . By contrast letters which we wanted to send by regular post came back as undeliverable . Several weeks passed like this . Mainly only the women the children and the old men remained behind in the ghetto . News trickled through that the ghettoes throughout the land were being cleared and the occupants were being deported in train waggons to an unknown destination . Also our turn would come . However for unknown reasons the ghetto in Pecs/LOC was the last of the Hungarian/GHETTO ghettoes to be liquidated actually on the 7th of July . When we were deported on this day from that time on the entire Hungarian province had become Judenrein/LOC / free of Jews . Jews remained only in the capital . We were herded together into an even narrower area in the stables of the barracks a few days before the deportation . Now the Hungarian gendarmes and the German SS were in charge . The treatment was unbelievably brutal . We were driven and harried like cattle . In between there were body searches which in reality meant that everything that we had with us was stolen . Money valuables and even wedding rings were taken away . The midwives from Pecs carried out body searches on the women . Finally every one of us received a piece of bread and another piece of rotten sausage as food for the journey . We were herded to the railway area and packed into waggons like animals . There were around 75 people to a waggon . During this indescribable scenes took place . Sick people who could not go were pushed or thrown in . Pregnant women and babies were added to this . A bucket with water and another 3 – for use as a toilet were placed in the waggon and then the doors were closed . We travelled throughout 3 days and 2 nights without receiving any further food or having the water renewed . We went through the station at Kassa/LOC German name Kaschau/LOC and there the doors were opened for a short time . However nothing was reached in . Only the bodies were taken out – at this time every waggon already had several dead . Then the journey continued onwards . It was unbearably hot inside the waggons and the air was suffocating . People driven to despair by the heat and by thirst ripped the clothes from their bodies . Some had fits of raving madness . Once again there were several deaths . Late in the evening of the 9th of July it was already completely dark the train finally stopped again . After a wait of several hours the doors were yanked open and the order to get out given . In the darkness we stumbled out into the fresh air . We had no idea where we were . Later when by some means we learned the name of the station this name meant nothing to us . No one of us had previously heard of this place before . The name was Auschwitz/CAMP . All around us was shouting and pandemonium . Orders which we did not understand were yelled out . We found ourselves on a type of ramp from which we were ordered and pushed down . A column was formed in the darkness in which the rows became confused and individual family members lost each other . As far as we were able to make out SS men and also women in SS uniform stood around us and yelled at us and drove us forwards with the help of beatings and kickings . There were other forms recognisable nearby dressed in the striped uniforms of prisoners mainly women . These engaged themselves in pulling out of the waggons those who could no longer lift themselves up by themselves . All of this proceeded with unbelievable brutality . We were driven along a path whereby truncheon blows rained down on us constantly from both sides . Scenes occurred on the way the meaning of which we were only able to understand much later . Still on the ramp when everything was muddled and confused it occurred that a woman wearing prisoner clothing lunged at a young woman who was deported with us and who held a small child in here arms . She ripped the child out of her arms and ran with him straight to another group of deportees and pushed the child there into the arms of an old woman . The mother ran after her screaming and attempted to get the child but in the disorderly turmoil the groups moved apart and the little child with the old woman remained to the immense despair of the mother . 4 – We only learnt much later the implications and importance of this action . That is at the selection all old people and all small children were sent automatically to the gas chambers . In addition also all women who carried a child in their arms were sent . The young woman who had the child taken away from her was saved in this way . The child and the old woman were lost in any case . The selection took place under floodlights . We learned later that the name of the man who had sent the individual victims either to the right or to the left was Dr. Mengele . The meaning of this process was also only clear to us later . I myself went with a group of younger women to the right . We were now conducted to a building where we still had nothing to eat but at least after many days we received fresh water to drink for the first time . Then we went into another room where we had to undress and were searched in the most brutal of ways . Anyone who still had the slightest thing with them had it taken away . We were only permitted to keep our shoes . In the next room we went under the shower and were then hustled onwards our hair was cut off and that involved not only the head but also all of the body hair was shaven . This all took place in the presence of SS men who went here and there urging us onwards and shouting at us . Most of us were much too exhausted and too apathetic to rebel somehow against this treatment . However if anyone made a sign of resistance or a gesture of modesty they were immediately mistreated with blows and kicks . In this way the final ounce of human value was beaten out of our bodies and we were completely degraded to animals . Finally after all of this was over we were allowed to dress . But all of our old things had disappeared never to be seen again . We were only allowed to keep our shoes which were completely wet through . We received as underwear only a rough shirt and no trousers . Then everyone of us received a piece of clothes that was thrown at us which in most cases did not fit but which we had to put on immediately . Some got torn evening wear others in turn received the remains of uniforms or prisoner clothing . In summary we all appeared as caricatures . Finally we were pushed into the open air . Two further days and nights passed during which we only received hard bread to eat and had to stand around until we were finally herded into the so called B camp and were accommodated there . Because in this barrack there were neither plank beds nor any other camp facilities the accommodation consisted of lying on the bare earth jammed together where most people did not even have enough room to stretch their limbs . 5 – We stayed several weeks in this camp . The ranks thinned out because many died every day in addition there were selections time and again . In addition new groups were also added . We had to carry out the bodies ourselves using sheets as litters the same sheets that the bread was brought into the barracks on . Besides the bread for nourishment there was a type of dehydrated vegetables as well as a soup in which long hard inedible threads or muck swam . Non one wanted to find out what in reality it was . The general opinion was that it was broom bristles . This brew was brought in in large dirty troughs whereby a trough came for every 5 women . Without any cutlery or spoons we had to slurp the pulp from these nauseating troughs . There was no water at all to wash and very little to drink . You were only allowed to go to the latrines at certain times . SS men stood around there and made their humorous remarks . An epidemic broke out soon after our arrival and almost all of the inmates of the barracks were afflicted by it . The mouth swelled up the body was covered with a type of leprosy and there were open wounds on the legs . During the selections which would sometimes occur several times a week we sought to hide traces of this illness in order not to be sent to the gas chambers . In the selections naked we had to file past a row of SS men . I had a large wound on the thigh . I succeeded in hiding it by marching past the selection committee with my arms stretched out on my legs in military strictness . We were not made to work . However standing in the assembly was a particular torture which lasted for hours every time . During this if you were caught not standing sufficiently straight enough you had to do innumerable knee bends as a punishment . There were blows and beatings in addition at every opportunity . In this it was not only the SS people who distinguished themselves in this but also the Capos and the latter consisted mainly of Polish women who had been in the concentration camp for years and who were completely brutalised . We had no contact with the other parts of the Auschwitz/CAMP camp . Despite that news trickled through . At the end of July or the beginning of August we heard that a riot was supposed to have taken place in the gypsy camp . We also heard in our own barracks wild screams shots and the barking of dogs from the gypsy barracks . This lasted for many hours . Later it was said that the riot was put down by the SS and all of the inmates of the gypsy camp had been taken to the gas chambers . 6 – In August many Polish Christians arrived in Auschwitz/CAMP whole families with children . They talked about the uprising in Warsaw/GPE . The majority of them were led to the gas chambers . In the middle of August we women from the B camp were deported away . Again we were put in waggons . This time there were around 50 people to a waggon . Before that everyone received a piece of sausage and a piece of bread . The journey lasted more than 24 hours . We froze terribly in the night in the thin clothes that we had on . The doors of the waggons stood open . During the entire journey an SS man and an SS woman stood guard . Both of them paid little attention to us and devoted themselves completely openly and unashamedly to the joys of love . On the next day at daybreak we arrived at Ravensbrueck/CAMP . In contrast to Auschwitz/CAMP where the look of the area had been bleak and dismal with scarcely a tree to see and no birdsong to hear Ravensbrueck/CAMP was situated in the middle of beautifully wooded surroundings . However we did not have much joy in that . At first we had to stand and wait for hours and then we were herded into the camp where we spent a further 24 hours in the open air without receiving anything to eat or drink . We were still primarily together as Hungarian Jews and the group from Pecs/GPE was also still together . But the total number had declined dreadfully . We had to lie down in the open air on a type of coal tip and we were black and dirty from head to toe . Then we were herded into a barrack in which at least there were plank beds and we received something to eat which was more substantial than we were used to from Auschwitz/CAMP . We stayed for 8 or 9 days in Ravensbrueck/CAMP which were filled in part in lying in the barracks and being fed and in part being driven out into the open air for a roll call where we had to constantly stand for many hours on end whilst SS people and capos who surrounded us on all sides regularly hit us with sticks obviously for no reason at all or because it pleased these completely dehumanised women . Once again at the end of August or the beginning of September we were herded into waggons and taken under very similar circumstances to our previous journey to Reinickendorf/CAMP near Berlin/GPE . There we went to a smaller work camp whose barrack rooms were furnished with wooden beds and small table and wooden stools all of which given what we had up till then endured 7 – appeared as an unbelievable luxury . The guards here consisted partly of SS personnel and partly of Wehrmacht soldiers . The latter were replaced later by Gestapo officials . Soon people in civilian clothes also appeared and asked after our jobs and our skills and work groups were put together . We went to work in the Argus aeroplane factory in Reinickendorf/CAMP where we had to work in two 12 hour shifts changing weekly from 6 am in the morning till 6 pm at evening to 6 pm in the evening to 6 am in the morning . Apart from us forced labourers and prisoners from all nations worked in the factory . There were French Russian Czechs Yugoslavs and men and women of all ages . The forced labourers were in a bit better position than we prisoners . They had the opportunity to go into the city and were also better fed . They were forbidden to speak to us . However they slipped us bread cigarettes or food whenever the opportunity offered itself . Our work consisted of simple hand work on machines . I never grasped and I can still not say today what sort of work we performed . It was certainly of not much value and as a result the foreman who was in charge of the supervision threatened to send us back to the concentrations camp . So our circumstances were bad enough . When we were sent back from the factory to the concentration camp there would always be a roll call during which there would be beatings on the part of the SS people again and again . Our position worsened at the end of January 1945 . Only a few remained in the factory . We Jewish prisoned were driven into the surrounding fields and woods and had to dig trenches there for the whole day long in the bitter cold . The instructions for the construction of an extension of a defence position were given by military engineers . However the supervision remained in the hands of the SS who were now even crueller than before if that was even possible . There were beatings at every opportunity . We froze terribly in our thin clothes but it was forbidden to protect ourselves against the cold . If the SS people or the female SS guards found out that someone had wrapped around their body a rag or a cloth that they had found against the cold then they hit the unfortunate woman with sticks and clubs and more than once it happened that the person was hit so long until they lay there dead . In addition to the cold and the abuse there was the torture of hunger . A result of the undernourishment which had by now lasted for months and also the present hard work and the completely inadequate food was that for many female prisoners nutritional oedemas appeared . The face and the limbs swelled up . We knew that in such cases the fellow sufferer was lost . 8 – Anyone who reported sick was taken away and we never heard anything from them again . On the 15th of March the fate of being taken for very special treatment different from the usual general mistreatment overtook me . Around this time we heard the thunder of artillery in the distance and the advancing front line and I expressed to a fellow prisoner that the Russians would soon be here and possibly that we would die before they come . This comment was overheard by a capo who immediately reported it to the SS . At first I was punched several times in the face by a female SS guard then I was taken away and sentenced to 25 strokes with a stick . I was laid on a wooden block and another female prisoner was ordered to hit me with a stick on my body . When she did not do it hard enough the female guard took the stick herself and completed the punishment herself . At the end I hung semi conscious over the block . I do not know if anyone counted the number of blows but in my opinion it must have been more than 25 . In addition on the same day my head was shaved completely and I was threatened that I would receive more strokes every evening . I would probably not even have survived a single repeat because I could neither sit nor walk . But in the following days my comrades in misery hid me regularly in their ranks and so in any event it remained a threat . Slowly I recovered more or less . The work on the trenches and redoubts continued but the signs of panic and confusion by the leadership increased . At the end of April we were no longer driven from our barracks to work . One day it could have been the 27th of April we were assembled and marched off in rows of 5 . The SS personnel were a bit friendlier to us and one of them said that he would personally cook us a good soup . He even did that but nothing good came out of it . All who had taken the soup suffered terrible diarrhoea on the subsequent march which was just that bit worse as we were not allowed to break ranks or even to stop . We were driven along further at the greatest possible speed and arrived on the same day at the Oranienburg/CAMP concentration camp . There complete chaos prevailed . Thousands of prisoners men and women stood and went around between the barracks . All order had evaporated . My attention was especially drawn to the large number of children who they had apparently herded here from somewhere just at this time . SS personnel ran around with their rubber truncheons some attempted to bring some type of order to the chaos others again were blind drunk . At several places ample food was distributed . There was even milk rice . 9 – In the evening it was announced by the SS that everyone must assemble in groups . The camp had to be cleared by midnight because then it would be blown up . A small group of Hungarian Jews got together and we decided not to march any further but to hide . We slipped into one of the bigger barracks and hid between the plank beds . Several times the SS opened the door and called that everyone should come out but apparently they did not dare to come inside and search the barracks . We remained silent and stayed where we were . Finally after many hours when complete tranquillity had occurred outside we slipped outside . Similar groups who like us had kept themselves hidden also appeared from other barracks . We also noticed that some SS personnel who were no longer in uniform but had put on civilian clothes were hurrying to the camp exit . We bumped into a group of Dutch and Belgian prisoners who were in a better physical condition than us and who now took over the leadership . They set out to investigate if the guards had disappeared from the camp . Because from time to time shots were heard from all sides we hid ourselves again in another barracks that was filled with bodies . We huddled for a long time behind the bodies and between the dirt and faeces . Then the Dutch and Belgian came back and said that the coast was clear . We came out again the SS had disappeared we were free . However some days passed before the Russians occupied the camp . We received some food from them and a Russian lorry took us to Landsberg/CAMP where they had established a large quarantine station . All of the main roads and also Landsberg/CAMP itself were filled by a vast amount of liberated forced labourers prisoners prisoners of war and so on who were all trying to go home . In Landsberg/CAMP itself there were many French prisoners of war . However these soon went home . Then the Poles the Czechs and the Yugoslavs were gradually transported home . We Hungarians had to wait more than 3 months until we had the possibility to go to our homes by way of large detours . It was only on the 13th of August that I reached Budapest/GPE and then got back to Pecs/LOC from there in a short time where I found my husband and my son already safe and sound . They had both survived the worst of times in the forced labour companies in different places and then after the failed separate 10 – peace attempt of Horthy on the 15th of October 1944 found themselves together in Budapest/GPE . There they then spent the rest of the time of persecution in hiding . Signature of Janka Galambos The eye witness Frau Galambos lived for several years after the war with her husband and son in Pecs/LOC . The family then moved to Budapest/GPE where they survived the years of the communist regime . After the Hungarian uprising of October 1956 the whole family fled to the west . The son is abroad . Frau Galambos and her husband have settled in London/GPE and both have jobs . Signature of A. Szanto 
description of the illegal life led by a Jewish woman who went underground 6 months after the death of her husband in Berlin/GPE . Non Jewish friends provided her with FALSE papers refuge at their own or friends houses and with food fuel and ration cards . Her submersion was prepared by her present husband Arthur Veit who at the time lived in the same flat . Among the people who gave her refuge were a landed estate owner and adherent of the Confessional Church Wolfgang Lent on his estate near Landsberg / Warthe a Catholic family in Duesseldorf/LOC Terwort/LOC a woman doctor in Berlin/GPE Lichterfelde Dr. Stoltenhoff the mayor of a village near Rheinsberg/LOC Georg Steffen . She was persuaded to go underground by the former editor of the social democratic paper Vorwaerts Alois Florath who died during the war who had heard in autumn 1942 from a policeman about the experiments made with gas vans for extermination . Other people who helped Mrs Veit during her illegal life were Friedrich Kroner after the war editor of the Frankfurter Illustrierte Dr. Stadtler formerly with Ullstein Prinz Salvator von Isenburg Dr. Schattauer her doctor Herta Zerner social democratic journalist Bruno Manuel journalist Otto Suhr the present Lord Mayor of West/LOC Berlin/GPE 9 . Further References Deportation of Jews working at Siemens end of February 1943 . On 3 January 1943 the Jewish Community in Berlin/GPE had to distribute forms for a new census as preparation for a new wave of deportations . Protest demonstration of Aryan wives of Jewish husbands against the deportation of partners of mixed marriages in Duesseldorf/LOC . 10 . Remarks See Report P.III.f . No . 535 also by Mrs Susanne Veit . Untergetaucht In mid 1942 people believed that the only way to secure protection in Berlin/GPE was by forced labour or employment within the Jewish community before evacuation . In August 42 we received another call for evacuation these calls were always disguised as a summons entitled Residence of the Jewish community . An over eager young doctor presumably employed by Prof. Lustig in the Jewish hospital – came to us to confirm the fact that my husband would not be fit for transportation . I remember exactly how the gruesome grotesque scene unfolded how my emaciated crippled terminally ill husband was forced to stand up and move around as she filled out the assessment . He died a few weeks later . The funeral was led by a man approved by the local authorities who was still permitted to use public transport and make phone calls . The day after the funeral I walked across town and went straight to the Jewish employment agency to apply for work in a factory . The woman in charge whose name I unfortunately ca remember shared some confidential information with me they had received a call a few days ago asking them to name all of their employees who were single . These single people would be taken away regardless of their job status – so she discouraged me from registering . The cemetery administration also had to pass on lists of those buried in the cemetery so in theory my protection ended the day my husband was buried . After his cremation I asked the man in charge to postpone the scheduled burial of the urn . I then waited a while before writing to the cemetery administration to inform them that I was ill and in no condition to come to Weissensee/LOC I was allowed to travel b y public transport for the burial and asked them to postpone the urn burial until I was in good health . A few weeks later I was informed by the cemetery administration that the ground was so frozen that it would be possible to bury the urn until the New Year . As a result I was safe for three months after the death of my husband . I left in the New Year . My school friend Alice Schnell who worked in forced labour for Siemens arranged for the urn to be buried at the same time as her aunt who died before she was evacuated . The burial was scheduled to take place on 28 February 43 . But a few days before this she received news – I do know where from – that a sudden ‘ collection of Siemens employees was imminent and would take place without warning . 2 My husband urn was placed with his parents but would eventually be lawfully moved to another location where my other family members were already buried . I rarely left the house after my husband died because more and more people were being taken off the street and taken away for the slightest thing . It was like watching dogcatchers . Another reason for my reluctance to leave the house was that the plans for my disappearance had come together . On 3 January 1943 a survey was circulated to gather information about marital status . The Jewish community was obliged to complete the survey and return it within two days . It seemed like the perfect time for me to escape . . . so I left on 7 January 1943 . At my husband requested I collected barbital . Over the course of two years I collected four tubes of it . I did keep it because even though I did see any way to disappear in the time following my husband death and felt completely useless and unprepared it never occurred to me to take my own life . After his death a relative from Neuköln/LOC arrived on 19 October 1942 and begged me for the barbital . She worked for the Jewish authorities so she and her husband were protected from evacuation . They took their daughter Alice Jacobsohn to a Jewish children home in southern Sweden/LOC when the war began . Then the Gestapo demanded lists of certain local government employees this is how strict and sneaky Nazi bureaucracy was and received certain information . I tried to give my relatives the courage they needed to come up with the best solution but ended up giving them the barbital . A week later I learned that they were both dead and had been buried . In the mean time they tried to persuade me to disappear . Alois Florath former editor of Vorwärts was the first person to immigrate to Prague/GPE . But while he was there he developed pernicious anaemia and went back to Berlin/GPE to be with his wife and doctor . He was allowed to return based on his wife diplomatic status and he subsequently worked as a non political cartoonist . He regularly worked with a former police commissioner at Souchay – a company that the Nazi had no legal control over . He was summoned to travel with the Berlin/GPE Jewish transport company the Jews would be handed over to the Gestapo or SS at the border . In the autumn of 1942 he heard about the buses being used for exterminations as they passed behind the 3 Czech border . They were known to Florath and his colleagues . It was clear to me that it made absolutely no sense to travel with them it was a path to certain death . I knew I had to try to save myself for the sake of my son . This was also the first time I had heard of this sort of extermination . At this point I realised that even F1 was not a safe place to be . Veit my partner lived in the same apartment in which we met – a real rarity at this time . He had been encouraged several times to move out of the Jewish apartment but he merely pretended to be looking for a new place . He convinced people that we lived separate lives in the apartment that we each had our own entrance our own allocated times to use the kitchen and did really know each other . He maintained that our situation was to make our lives a bit easier for example with the small things like cigarettes white bread and milk – things we could get anymore and that when our Aryan friends came to visit they used his door instead of mine . After spending a lot of time trying – and failing – to come up with ideas he finally figured out a way to obtain a legal birth and christening certificate for me using the name of an old friend . As soon as I had these documents our old friend Friedrich Kroner was able to make things happen for us . Kroner himself was in a ‘ mixed race relationship as his wife was Aryan . She was a really active helpful woman . After the war he established the Frankfurter Illustrierte – the best illustrated newspaper in Germany/GPE – in it current form . I was introduced to Dr. Stadtler who was originally born in Alsace/GPE and worked as the editorial director at Ullstein Verlag for many years before the Hitler Regime in the hope that his job status would help us work against the regime . It should have been clear to him straight away that this idea would work . As I got to know him I believed he was unemployed but somehow officially registered as employed in manufacturing . In reality he worked on the black market all the time waiting for the fall of Hitler as is way into politics . I think he belonged to a centre or people party . His older son was in the German army and at that time based in Rome/LOC where he fell in love with the daughter of an immigrant art dealer . His wife Christin Dr. Stadler had just returned from Rome/LOC after going to meet the bride . During her trip she made the secret engagement official and arranged for her son and his love to be married after the fall of Hitler . The last time they heard from their son was before the allies landed in Sicily/GPE . He then went missing and presumably died in the first battle after the landing . 4 Unfortunately before he died my husband witnessed the Germans hoisting the flag on the summit of the/LOC Caucasus/LOC Mountains/LOC and died with the feeling that we had lost to them . When I met Dr. Stadtler in November 1942 the situation could not have been more different . Dr. Stadtler used a map of Russia/GPE that he knew very well to point out the German front and show us that defeat was imminent . He also emphasised that I should try to cross the border during this time . He then took me with him to see the catholic priest in Frohnau/LOC where he lived in the hope that he could give me a FALSE identity card or passport . But a week later the passport supplier was exposed and as far as I am aware the priest also had to ‘ disappear for a while . Dr. Stadtler along with one of his co conspirators then made his first attempt to find me refuge with one of his other co conspirators – a landowner . I was registered with him starting 7 January 1943 . Veit my husband would still be named as a contact person . On the evening of 6 January he brought a suitcase containing my most important possessions to Zoo train station and in the morning I left the house to meet Kroner . He would take me to the train heading for Küstrin/LOC . The train leaving at the same time from the next platform was an official train . Lots of high status officers stood beside the train in their brown uniform draped with medals . Wolfgang Lent the Lord of the Manor – and his wife were waiting for me at the small station in Lipke/LOC village . They had a sledge ready to transport my suitcase through the snow to the castle . He was an incredibly intelligent and well read man and the owner of a large library . He was also a member of the denominational church his sister was actually married to the Parisian Ambassador von Spiegel . Apart from Lent his wife and the inspector no one was allowed to know my identity . And then the training began . I had to verify that there was no record of my monogram anywhere always thinking about how I behaved in different situations and how I answered questions . Shortly after the radio channel announced that lots of German nationals had registered with the job centre and taken up work which made everything more difficult . Between 10 and 12 French prisoners were employed as farm workers officially in a strictly segregated camp but in reality they were always in and out of the castle . I stayed there longer than originally planned until one night the inspector delivered the news that the bicycle seller in the neighbouring town – who was a close friend – had been arrested . His arrest led us to the conclusion that the Gestapo from 5 Landsberg am Warthe were blackmailing people . The castle had already been searched – a document had been filed to the Gestapo in Landsberg/LOC about Lent himself . So that night I packed my case and got up at 4 am . One of the French prisoners who was standing at the door with a horse drawn carriage ready to make the two hour journey through the fields in the dark until we reached our destination of a neutral train station . In Berlin/GPE I met Lent again but could travel any further due to the ever stricter train controls in the East/LOC . I am still good friends with Mrs Lent today . She now leads a somewhat modest life in Lübeck/LOC with her three children but is still regarded as the wife of a refugee by the locals . After volunteering himself Mr Lent was drafted in to deal with the complaints on behalf of his inspector . Part of the reason for his drafting was that like many others he believed that the collapse of Hitler was imminent . He went missing in Silesia/LOC shortly before the war ended . In the meantime Dr. Stadtler had found a new accommodation for me this time with friends of his wife in Düsseldorf/LOC . I stayed with a friend in Berlin/GPE until it was time for me to go . Opportunities were more limited by this point because even at this stage mixed race families were already being rounded up . For two days Jewish family members – especially husbands – were taken away . This Nazi exercise failed as the courageous ‘ Aryan wives staged a protest next to the centre where their husbands were being held . The protest was so fierce that the Nazis had to give in and let everyone go . Stadler also sent me to friends of his in Germany/GPE Ms. Von Paczenski and Generalswitwe Tenczin . They welcomed me with open arms and kisses and planned to introduce me to friends and family as their laundry maid . But this was enough for the authorities and I was sent back to Düsseldorf/CAMP . Dr. Stadtler gave me 100 Marks to give to his friend Prince Salvator von Isenburg when I got to Berlin/GPE . Aside from this I had a small reserve that our doctor Dr. Schattauer had helped me with . When he was still allowed to have Jewish patients he looked after my husband for a long time – I think up till the year before my husband died – and often visited us after that . When I told him about my underground escape plan he sent me a somewhat unfriendly reminder of my unpaid bills . The total amounted to roughly the same figure that was in my 6 savings account about 900 money for medical bills was kept separate from the other fixed monthly resources . As soon as I had transferred the money to him he brought it to me . His wife was Jewish . During my time under the radar I met her a few times . She would park her car in a quiet side street and give me ration cards . Veit used my three month absence from Düsseldorf/CAMP to cover my tracks and distract the police . I also stayed away from parts of Berlin/GPE that I had lived from in the past . I had already figured out the timetable of the passenger trains through the Rhineland/LOC . Travelling on an express train without photographic ID – I only had my birth certificate – was already impossible at this stage . So I travelled across Germany/GPE for two days on a slow train . It was also no longer possible to spend the night in train stations due to the controls that had been put in place . On the first night I arrived in Brauenschweig/CAMP and called a – as yet unknown to me – couple a mixed marriage who were friends of relatives in Berlin/GPE also a mixed marriage . They were really scared but nevertheless welcomed me with friendly faces . Thankfully there were no attacks that night – the air raid shelters would have been a problem – and they put me on a train the next day . Mr Ladewig held a high position in Westermann publishing house and despite being married to a Jewish woman still went on business trips to Paris/GPE . They had a very good marriage . At the beginning of 1945 his wife was summoned to certain evacuation … they then committed suicide by hanging themselves in their bedroom . Following a large scale attack on Essen/CAMP rail transport in the Ruhr/LOC area was so chaotic that there were many checks taking place . I eventually reached Düsseldorf/LOC on the evening of the second day . Neither trams not taxi would take me to my destination – that I was still unfamiliar with – at this time and in the end I walked with for an hour a man who disappeared into his house a block before I reached my destination . I later learned that this man was a very unpleased party member . In Düsseldorf/LOC I stayed with the same family but moved between the sisters houses . They were all devout Catholics . My main host Mr Terwort – an auditor – was around when I arrived so I went to his brother – a master tailor – who lived only a street away . His brother had no idea I even existed . After I had explained to him who I was he looked after me until his brother came back . I created a different carefully thought out and rehearsed story 7 for each homeowner ranging from the bombs in Berlin/GPE to provisional holidays and many more . The hardest thing to deal with was the night bombings . I took care of the auditor house – where many women sought refuge from parts of the country affected by bombings – so when there was an alarm the first thing I did was take his valuables to the cellar and stayed alone he had to carry out duties for the fire service . I always left the front and back doors open in case I needed to escape quickly if the cellar was searched . I handed him the few fake documents that I had so that I would be identified if I ran into the authorities . If I saw any officials during my day to day life and had to protect myself I hid my documents in my shopping bag and made sure the bag was as far from me as possible either in a corner or under a bench . Mr Terwort represented the whole family in the party . His membership card was kept in a drawer in the kitchen table and I had to get a monthly ticket from the cashier . Every morning he brought the newspaper into the kitchen and we discussed the likelihood of the fall of Hitler . When it was time to return to Berlin/GPE I had to travel by passenger train . There was no timetable available . My question raised some suspicion at the desk what type of person would make this journey on anything other than an express train ? To make things worse the train station in Düsseldorf/LOC was so badly damaged by bombs that there were no timetables on display . I had no other option than to make the hour long tram journey to Duisburg/LOC – where the train station had not been damaged and make a copy of the timetables . I caught a train at midday and travelled through the suburbs at a normal speed . When we reached Kaiserwerth/CAMP the train picked up speed . The conductor closed the doors and said So ! There are x amount of stops between here and Duisburg/CAMP ! Hopefully you all have your ID cards with you . Tonight the checks will be particularly tough . A few English nationals ran away . Given that getting off the train before the final destination would make a passenger stand out I did really have a choice – I had to stay put . Luckily both of my journeys went smoothly . I arrived back from Berlin/GPE in one piece and had gathered a lot of material to explain myself . 8 During my absence my husband Arthur Veit had been up to various things . He initially worked as a hairdresser in the theatre and in films and on Kurfürstendamm where many of his clients were famous actresses . He was on the board of directors for the Engelufer workers union and although he did belong to – or receive payment from any particular party 33 house searches were subsequently carried out and he was faced with many difficulties . During the war he had to go to the Gestapo in Burgstrasse/STREET . The first time because he did receive a reply and the second time because of hiding Jews namely an old married couple – Mr & amp Mrs Falk – who practically lived in our home with us . They received notice of their evacuation and wanted to disappear through the underground tunnels – they were distraught unprepared and clumsy . Without knowing who he really was they went to a former servant in a village near to their hometown of Freyburg/LOC an/LOC der/LOC Unstrut/LOC . After some time they gave up came back to us handed themselves in to the police and had to hand everything over . They went to the meeting point at the synagogue in Levetzowstrasse/STREET and after they had been guided through in reality this was the term they used to describe the final separation from the outside world their belongings were returned to them – including warm duvets – and a member of the Jewish Council accompanied them . Even after this was over more heated interrogations in Burgstrasse/STREET would follow many resulting in violence . There was also the danger that you would run into machinery there and he barely had time to escape which he accomplished partly due to the fact that his son was on the frontline . In 1942 Arthur managed to leave the area he had been living in . As a result of his asthma – and the help of his doctor he was able to give up his job and take up a position as a so called service person in the armed forces . He was employed as an office worker in the Central Archive for Military Medicine – an archive of all army and concentration camp medical records in the Reichstag government building . His service papers votn O.K.H often allowed him to escape difficult situations . He was also given the chance to rent one of his colleagues unused weekend homes in Mellensee/LOC for the summer and later as an emergency accommodation during attacks . He let me stay in this accommodation too especially during crucial times 9 in my journey . After I had disappeared official collectors tried to find me at the house several times . The first time they came I was in Düsseldorf/LOC . Veit told them that he had realised I had gone for a few days and that when he last saw me my behaviour had become erratic so maybe I had done something to myself . After a while my accommodation and belongings were thrown away . Even before I disappeared we cleaned everything up and put some of my belongings in his room so that if the authorities came they would just see my room as a barely furnished spare room and maybe even offer to buy everything from him . In the end everything was settled with 80 marks some schnapps and some cigarettes . They the officers still insisted on rolling up carpets and taking them too . Veit took a risk – and it paid off . If we had cleared everything I would have lost everything in the bombing that destroyed the flat and the cellar . When I got back from Düsseldorf/LOC I had to contact the estate in Mellensee/LOC where he was only known as the air force worker who visited his girlfriend . Nazis could be seen on many of the former weekend homes that once belonged to Jews . Our next door neighbour was the local group leader and always wore a golden pheasant uniform . The area had been completely militarised surrounding by the garrison – Wünsdorf/LOC shooting ranges a pionierpark and an air force warehouse . While this was going on Veit had taken the time to collect enough essentials for me . Given that fat was so hard to come by I mostly used cod liver oil that we received as a gift to fry potatoes outside . One day I decided to get some travel ration cards – how I do know – because it would allow me to spend a month in Kagar/LOC bei/LOC Rheinsberg/LOC as the secretary of Alois Florath namely helping him with a film manuscript . He kept himself to himself in Berlin/GPE in order to remain as anonymous as possible . Herta Zerna a friend of his who was a former social democratic journalist and owned a house in Kagar/LOC wanted to do the same . She put Florath in touch with the wonderful Georg Steffen the mayor who also worked as a farmer and landlord and took him to the inn . This story is discussed in H. Zernas book Es lag bei Rheinsberg . My stay in Kagar/LOC where I was know as Charlotte Klose the name on my birth certificate – features on page 102 . 10 The mayor of this tiny village – whose family had been mayors of the same village for generations – joined the party in 33 . He joined when an evil Nazi from Berlin/GPE expressed interest in taking over the village . By joining the party he restored peace in the village . Herta Zerna and her mother were aware of my TRUE identity . Mr and Mrs Steffen guessed without being told . When I left at the end of the month Mrs Steffen gave me a sealed envelope . It contained untouched ration cards and an invitation to return . I never saw a flag in the village . The very peaceful government office in the neighbouring village requested that Steffen Polish farm workers did not live or eat with the family and were strictly regulated . He showed me the letter before he threw it away . These workers tearfully kissed us goodbye when the war ended . Steffen son was called up to perform duties as a lance corporal at all during the war . Even now this type of thing still happens . My next stop was Lichterfelde/CAMP Ost/CAMP a suburb of Berlin/GPE that I had never visited before . A good friend of Florath worked there as a doctor . Her housekeeper lost her nerve following the bombings and left Berlin/GPE . I stepped in for her in the house and surgery telling the patients and neighbours that my boss had loaned me out . Dr. Stoltenhoff who now lives in West Germany/GPE belonged to a practice . Her first marriage was to a mixed race man which led her to lose her position as a recognised doctor . She was forced to set up her own practice in order to raise her children from her first and second marriage . Joining the party was her only option . She also kept her membership card in the kitchen drawer I had to look after it . Her social circle included artists and writers . She tried her best to integrate me into the circle but despite her best efforts I was still only included to a certain extent . The bombings got worse and she worked in the doctor surgery day and night . A good friend of hers was hiding in a cellar on the Kudamm/LOC and the doctor eventually decided to bring her to Lichterfelde/CAMP . She had suffered back injuries and had to lie still so I took care of her . Due to the overcrowding on the trains and other medical centres it was impossible to take her out of the city all of our attempts failed . But then her husband – who was in Paris/GPE – found out . He was an architect 11 for the ministry of aviation and his entire department was taken over by the SS . He came straight to Berlin/GPE uniform stowed away in his suitcase . He put the uniform on went to the SS and three days later his wife was taken to Hohlychen/CAMP . This was a medical centre belonging to the SS . It was the best place to treat this type of injury . An elegant looking ambulance pulled up four SS officers got out and took her to the vehicle on a stretcher . I held her hand until they left and she said Charlotte darling ca you come with me ? Some of the neighbours went with her as far as they could . The lady who lived in the house across had also recently fled to the countryside . A few days later we heard that the academic scholar was expected to return and even though Miss Klose was a very efficient woman she was unsure if she could cope with the job in their house . The night bombings in Berlin/GPE were getting worse and worse . Homeowners were forced to hide in the shelters when the alarm sounded but I stayed alone in the cellar with the little Dachshund hoping that the doctor would be able to cover if anything happened to me . She was an intelligent and skilful woman . She even managed to help her own daughter avoid being denounced when she illegally slipped something into a French prison and allegedly flirted with the prison officers . Often after the attacks so many people would come to eat that I would have to borrow cutlery from the neighbours . Although I was happy and found the job interesting as a result of the bombings it became harder and harder for me to convince Mrs Steffen – the Mayor of Kagar/LOC – to come out . From then on I split my time between Kagar/LOC and the piece of land in Mellensee/LOC . In the end the Steffens were willing to put themselves in danger and let me stay with them . But I had to come up with my own cover story . Gossip did generally travel around the village so they were easy to convince . All I had to do was figure out the best thing to tell them and how long I could stay . Zerna aging mother told us everything that she heard from the locals . Veit occasionally came to visit as a groom and they the locals suspected that he was visiting a young woman in the village . But the valid reason that I received for his presence was that Florath was gravely ill . He died from stomach cancer shortly after the war had ended . I cared for him until his wife could leave Berlin/GPE and look after him herself . 12 In the same year my son found out that I was still alive A. Florath went to Berlin/GPE for the day and met Bruno Manuel – a journalist – on the street . He asked why Manuel was working as a freelancer in Berlin/GPE instead of going to the countryside . Manuel replied that he could go to the country I ca leave here because I am hiding a Jewish woman . Florath replied that he was doing the same and proceeded to tell him about me . Manuel then spent some time in Switzerland/GPE as far as I know with the Jewish woman he had been protecting . I do know if they crossed the green border . When they reached Zürich/LOC he told Moritz Loeb our friend and former editor of Ullstein what he knew about me and then he wrote to my son in Scotland/GPE . After Alois Florath died his wife tried to find another alibi for me in the village . There were only a few people in the villages who had a position within the party – they were know as the NSV leaders – so I stayed out of their way as far as possible . Mrs Florath used some sort of excuse to take me to one of the leaders and told him that was leaving me her typewriter so that I could take care of her late husband manuscripts and the estate he had left behind . In reality this did not need to be done . But the NSV leader said that he knew of a landowner who urgently needed a capable secretary . I then had to go to the labour office where they were able to help me find a post easily . I really do know how we pulled it off . In any case I had to tell different stories until the war ended in order to get the work I so desperately needed from the labour office . In Kagar/LOC I had to sit for hours by an open window and type anything that I heard coming from outside the office . The writer Peter von Hamm was a good friend of Herta Zerna . After the war he worked as a dramaturge in the German theatre then was suddenly arrested by the Russians . We do know why he was arrested but he later died in a concentration camp . Before he died he would send envelopes containing newspaper cuttings to our isolated village . These envelopes were always addressed to Miss Klose . They would also contain work from Berlin/GPE for me and I would take them to the real addressee . In certain circumstances I had to go to Berlin/GPE to deliver work in reality I went to our piece of land in Meilensee/LOC . Thanks to Otto Suhr – the current mayor of Berlin/GPE – and his wife I did have to stay in an unheated house while I was there . He had also got to know the mayor of Kagar/LOC through Herta Zerna . So when things in Berlin/GPE got a bit 13 difficult he and his wife would come to stay with the Steffens for a few days . Since he came from the area that I often stayed in in Meilensee/LOC they offered us some briquettes that they had stored in their cellar . Veit took them little by little from the house in Meinlensee/LOC . The journey to Mellensee/LOC was mainly on local and city trains . You could usually be sure that you would be checked . And I had already figured out that to get past the military controls in Zossen/CAMP and Wünsdorf/CAMP all I had to do was walk confidently with the silver shield pressed against my chest . It was best if I walked behind the deserters because they would go straight to the controls to ask for information . On this particular journey luck was on my side . A cordon at the train station and checks on the trains in search of escaped prisoners and polish farm workers was taking place on the day that Veit took the earlier train . He knew that I originally wanted to take the later train so he decided to come back and let me know what has happening . The day time bombings were getting worse and worse and as a result two things happened on one hand there were far more days filled with confusion and on the other hand it became more and more important not to attract attention . Up till this point the people who stood out were the busybodies and the informers . In the last few months of the war you could even travel the short distance from Rheinsberg/LOC to Berlin/GPE by train without a permit . But because I still officially had work to collect in Berlin/GPE I snuck out of the house before dawn and went to Herta Zerna house . There I hid in the basement ate the bread I had brought with me and went back to the inn when it was dark so that I could talk to the guests about the journey to Berlin/GPE the next day . The last time – in March as the tracks of the refugees from East/LOC Prussia/LOC and Pomerania/GPE became visible on the country roads an NSV official came to the village to visit Herta Zerna and allocate some refugees . For whatever reason she managed to delay him by one more day . She was very skilful . The staff followed the paths that the refugees had taken . The paths veered to the West and used our village as a sort of temporary location . I had a somewhat distressing experience at the end . Everything was gone even some of the families from the village had left heading west on their journey . The Russians had to be quite near we were waiting for them calling it the calm before the storm . Then two young soldiers appeared at the inn with the order that they should wait by the telephone and pass on any relevant information . We sat with them in the restaurant 14 trying to gently make it clear to them that they could illegible their lives if they gave up on this pointless task and abandoned the illegible . One of them 25 years old at most and obviously an academic or student he told us that he was married and had a young child instantly became defensive expressing his distaste at the suggestion that he should disobey what his spiritual leader Alfred Rosenberg had said and written . He spoke in a string of well formed sentences but I ca remember what he said word for word because although everything sounded clear it was still confusing . I saw for myself how an intelligent person had been so convinced by nonsense and was willing to give his life based on what he had been told . The end began after we had greeted the first Russian tank . There was one more counter attack from Germany/GPE – target from the surrounding forests – and in the last few seconds of the night from 30 April to 1 May I got injured another concussion and a hole in my temple . I think it was caused by a grenade shell which landed in our stable . I had to walk around with a dressing on my head luckily this was uncommon . The village remained cut off from the rest of the world for another seven weeks . For this entire time I had to stay close by the mayor coattail . As a result even the GPU – who had been staying with him for a while – left us alone . A delegate from the socialist communist party in the neighbouring village came to us and asked him to keep his Amz ? But after I left the Russians arrested him . I am sure this happened as a result of informing people and harassing former Nazis . When the news reached us in Berlin/GPE he was already well into his train journey . We spent months years looking for him in an attempt to free him and then we heard that he died in a concentration camp six months after he was arrested . Veit was still around when the war ended . When he heard that his office would be closed and merged with the armed SS he fled Berlin/GPE and made his way to Meilensee/LOC . By this point Mellensee/LOC was occupied by the Russians . After seven weeks he made his way to me . It took him several days to reach Kagar/LOC on foot and then go back to Berlin/GPE with me . And then I hid away in the very same – albeit ¾ damaged – flat that still belonged to him . The same flat I once fled . 
witness a doctor receptionist by profession was sent from Theresienstadt/GHETTO to Auschwitz/CAMP in January 1943 . Working as a nurse in Block 10 she frequently saw Dr. Clauberg arriving by car from his private clinic in Konigshütte/CAMP . He always wore civilian clothes . Block 10 had been part of the male section of the Camp and was erected on the site of the former quarantine station . Here Dr. Clauberg and his assistants Dr. Schumann Dr. Wirtz Dr. Munch Dr. Weber and Dr. Gobel carried out the notorious experiments . They were aided by Dr. Poring originally a prisoner who went over to the Germans and Dr. Samuel who wrote a scientific study on their work and who was shot later on . In the estimate of the witness there were approximately 500 women in the block who were always changing as those unfit for further experiments were sent back to Birkenau/CAMP or gassed and replaced by newcomers frequently selected directly from the arrival platform . The selections were mostly made by Dr. Wirtz and Aumajer . The experiments were carried out with some of the products of I.G. Farben who paid the camp administration through Dr. Clauberg for this arrangement . At some time Block 10 was intended to be closed down but Dr. Clauberg prevented this in order to continue the experiments . Once about 90 women were sent to the Rasseninstitut at Innsbruck/CAMP their fate is unknown to the witness . The experiments consisted of 3 painful injections administered at intervals which induced sterilisation . After each injection an x ray was taken . Dr. Clauberg attitude was cynical and obscene . The witness corroborates other statements that selection for Block 10 was equivalent to a death sentence . 9 . Further References Sylvia Friedman now Vesela assistant to Dr. Clauberg . Dr. Hanak Czech doctor . Testimony in the Criminal Proceedings Against the Late Prof. Carl Clauberg Attorney General Prague . Prague 23 May 1957 . Witness statement record . Interviewer Dr. Bsrbaš . Note taker Pokorná . Expert doctor MUDr . Jan Češpiva certified expert in accordance with § 114 of the German penal code . Witness Ilona Vohryzková born 10 . 6 . 1915 in Přibram/LOC . Place of residence Prague/GPE 12 U keramické skoly 5 . Occupation Pensioner Previous occupation Administrative employee in a clinic previously a medical assistant . Proof of identity Citizen identity card No.15.56.10/022 issued 13.12.50 under No . 55873 OV NB Prague/GPE 12 registration number 5 477202 . Heard in the criminal proceedings against Karl Clauberg . The witness was duly informed of their right to refuse to give their statement in accordance with para 108 of the Penal Code as well as of the significance of a witness statement from the point of view of public interest and of the consequences of giving a FALSE statement in accordance with para 109 of the Penal Code also that the record may be altered to be consistent with her statement in accordance with para 112 of the Penal Code . In December 1942 I was brought to the camp in Theresienstadt/GHETTO and from there I was taken to Auschwitz/CAMP at some point in January 1943 . First I was in block no . 15 in Birkenau/CAMP . After approximately a month there I was taken to block no . 30 or no . 31 in Birkenau/CAMP and a few months later I was taken to block no . 10 in Auschwitz/CAMP . I know that the experiments began in the Birkenau/CAMP block which Dr Clauberg and I think Dr Schumann carried out . Dr Clauberg came to Birkenau/CAMP in his car from his private clinic in Königshütte/CAMP and he was the only one of the SS as far as I could see that wore civilian clothes and did wear a uniform . The experiments carried out in Birkenau/CAMP were initial experiments . 2 Block No . 10 in Auschwitz/CAMP was part of the male camp even though women were housed there . It was built on the site of the previous quarantine station of the men camp . Dr Clauberg and Dr Schumann did their experiments in this block . Also Dr Wirtz Dr Münch Dr Weber and Dr Göbel then also Dr Döring who was originally a prisoner but then registered himself with the Germans . There may possibly have been others but I ca remember any others . The imprisoned doctor Dr Samuel also worked here for Dr Wirtz . When he wrote about the results based on the experiments carried out with the help of his medical expertise he was shot and Dr Wirtz picked up his work . I worked as a nurse in block No . 10 . On the ground floor there were two rooms which were provided for the doctors work . But the women rooms intended for the experiments were on the first floor . The staff including nursing staff lived on the ground floor . As a nurse I worked the same as the rest of the staff for both rooms and therefore for all of the doctors who did experiments in block no . 10 . Aside from the women who were experimented on there were also sick people there whose illnesses had nothing to do with the experiments . This was kept secret however as otherwise they would have been sent to the gas chambers . To my knowledge on average there were around five hundred women who were experimented on . There were around five hundred the actual population varied continuously of course as some left who were sent back to Birkenau/CAMP and other new women topped up the numbers again . The newly added women were selected directly from the transport on the train station . I can not say with certainty who selected them but I believe it was usually Aumajer and Wirtz . I do know if Dr Clauberg made selections himself and I can not claim that he did . I do know however that Dr Clauberg was also an agent for I.G. Farben and that he paid a certain sum for the management of the concentration camp in Auschwitz/CAMP on behalf of this company . For this sum he bought the concentration camp women who were selected for experiments using products of I.G. Farben on living healthy women . I know that the administration of the concentration camp wanted to close down block no . 10 . But Dr Clauberg‘s main task was to work on these experiments and he had an interest in it continuing and prevented the closure of block no . 10 . He needed these women for his experiments and it being closed down would have meant they would be sent to . In block no . 10 there was to my knowledge Dr Clauberg assistant Sylvia Friedman now Veseiá who knew the most about Dr Clauberg experiments . I know that classification in the Birkenau/CAMP labour camp meant death for every woman . 3 I remember a case where a certain number of women were selected from block no . 10 from the staff in the block and from other women in order to be sent to Innsbruck/CAMP to a race institution . Then approximately ninety women were sent however none of the staff from block 10 were there . I do know any more about the fate of these women after that . I also know that some women were sent back to Birkenau/CAMP after the end of the experiments . From time to time transport went from the block to Birkenau/CAMP and transport also came to block no . 10 with new women . What I know about the experiments of Dr Clauberg is that the women were given injections containing some substance or another in three intervals so in three doses which was supposed to sterilise the women . However I do know what the injections were made up of . An x ray image was taken after every injection . The injections were painful as a result of them the women had ovarian inflammation and had fever which was however suppressed with the help of medication from the SS hospital . Dr. Clauberg‘s behaviour with the women he carried out experiments on was cynical . He made inappropriate comments and jokes . The women were of course scared of him but they had no choice . I do not know about the surgical experiments carried out by Dr Clauberg i.e. ones other than the ones I have already spoken about . Dr Göbel participated in the experiments as a chemical employee . I know that there were deaths in block no . 10 but I can not claim that these were cases that were a result of Dr Clauberg experiments . I know that those who were sent to Birkenau/CAMP after Dr Clauberg experiments died there and that there were only a few that survived the work in Birkenau/CAMP . I wasn‘t there during the last phase of evacuation of block no . 10 as block no . 10 was taken to a new SS camp and as I was evacuated from this camp I was together with the women from block no . 10 . I met many of them on my way though . My overall conclusion about the experiments is that it was horrific . Dr Clauberg visited block no . 10 from outside was there all the time I ca remember what his relationship was like with the other doctors it is such a long time ago . In my opinion based on the whole issue even taking into consideration the amount of time that has passed I regard Dr Clauberg as a 4 war criminal as he deprived hundreds of young women of the possibility of fertilization and therefore the possibility of a proper existence . I think it is most urgent and necessary that Sylvia Friedman is questioned as she knew the most with respect to all of the details of Dr Clauberg work . I know from Czech people that Dr Hanák came to the block bringing medical assistance . Read approved and signed . 1 Unknown but probably short for gas chambers 
Milman a Polish Jew worked as a gardener at the house of SD Hauptscharführer Gustav Wilhelm Maybauer from Berlin/GPE outside the ghetto in Radom as the Nazis allowed Jews in Radom to work only if in possession of special identity papers issued by the SD . In 1941 Mr Milman was transferred to an arms factory . When the Russians approached Warsaw/GPE he was sent to various concentration camps Tomaszow Mozowieck Auschwitz/CAMP Winenden/CAMP near Stuttgart/CAMP Unter Rexingen Kochendorf/CAMP and in 1945 to Dachau/CAMP . Conditions were the same everywhere inmates who had to work under inhuman conditions died of hunger and privations or were brutally shot . In 1945 Mr Milman was evacuated in the direction of Seefeld in Tyroi/LOC he escaped and was liberated by the American forces in Bavaria/LOC . 4 . Date 1939 1945 . 5 . Number of pages 4 . Language German . 6 . Author or Source Paysach Milman . 7 . Recorded by Dr. Fritz Friedlaender . Experiences of a Polish Jew in Ghettoes and Concentration Camps When the Nazis invaded Poland/GPE in 1939 the 18 year old unmarried Mr Milman lived with his parents together with 2 brothers and 5 sisters . He worked with his father in the leather trade . In the fourth week of the Nazi occupation he fled with 5 other young Jewish people to Lemberg/LOC which was then occupied by the Russians and was considered safe . Thousands of refugees had gathered there already and not only Jewish refugees . The group of the 6 young Jews remained together and carried out casual labour . Because the Russians mobilised skilled workers and forcibly enlisted those fit for military service for the Red Army Mr Milman voluntarily returned to Radom on 31.12.1939 out of fear to be enlisted by the Russians . Here he experienced the usual persecution measures by the Nazis the enlisting of Jews to degrading forced labour such as street cleaning etc . Abuse of Jews of all kinds the forced resettlement to ghettos carried out under the lead of a Judenrat Jewish Council K.W. the ever deteriorating famine the recruitment of Jewish workers for the construction of fortresses at the German Russian border . Mr Milman lived unregistered and hidden with his family in the ghetto his father could only support the family with savings because he had been forced to liquidate his business . 1941 a member of the Jewish militia gave Mr Milman the urgent advice to take on such employment for which the SD issued special identity papers for essential employees because only holders of such special identity papers were exempt from the imminent evacuation . On this advice Mr Milman accepted a job as a gardener for the SD Hauptscharführer Gustav Wilhelm Maybauer from Berlin/GPE other than him two young Jewish girls worked there . He continued to live with his family in the ghetto and went every day with his identity card to work at Maybauer house located outside the ghetto with whom he did not come in contact even though he had the opportunity to the see him coming home blood stained because the execution of any kind was part of his obligations . When a large evacuation took place at night in 1941 Mr Milman family was also deported he never saw them again . The two Jewish girls who worked with him lost their families in the same way . Mr Milman remained alone in the house at first until a general relocation 2 of the Jews to a downsized ghetto took place . There murders happened on a day to day basis Jews either were killed on the spot or abducted to be shot . The sparse food that was given out at the ghetto had to be obtained by food tickets . On 13.1.1942 another resettlement took place only younger Jews – about 1200 – stayed behind . Those Jewish workers employed by the SD were registered there was a rumour of a plan to exchange them for the Templars in Palestine/GPE . But instead the SD administration received the command to let go all Jewish workers . One morning people of the Jewish militia came to collect Mr Milman early in the morning from his bed and brought him to an arms factory where he as a worker was replaced by two 2 carpenters . In this factory located in Radom 2 – 3000 people were occupied with the manufacturing of guns there was no pay but a starvation diet the people had to sleep in barracks – like cattle . The downsized ghetto was liquidated and converted into a concentration camp surrounded by barbed wire the remaining inmates were divided into workers they had to wear inmate clothing instead of plain clothes and work hard despite the worst alimentation . Mr Milman worked at the arms factory until the advance of the Russians on Warsaw/GPE 1944 . The labour camp in which he was was then evacuated and moved to Tomaszow/CAMP Mozowieck/CAMP about 2 – 3000 Jewish workers were forced to march for two days and two night without sleep elderly members of the marching column who could not walk any further due to weakness were shot on the spot . When the survivors arrived in Tomaszow/CAMP – near Lodz/GHETTO the women were quartered at the town jail while the men were remained guarded in town for three days with no occupation . Then – it was in the summer of 1944 – they were transported to Auschwitz/CAMP on a cattle truck with no food . As found out after the war in general and also to Mr Milman the Nazis transported the women to Auschwitz/CAMP as well in separate cattle trucks . A selection took place upon arrival remaining children and youths were sent to the gas chambers . The women stayed in Auschwitz/CAMP their fate is unknown to Mr Milman however he does know that some of them survived . Himself was because he was deemed fit to work spared . He had to take a seat in the cattle truck again with the others who were spared and begin the long journey to the new concentration camp Winenden/CAMP near Stuttgart/CAMP . The accommodation was the usual for a concentration camp many 3 inmates died of starvation . The Nazis planned to use the inmates for the construction of an underground factory . Shortly afterwards Mr Milman was transferred to another camp that was only being opened – Unter Rexingen – where only 400 randomly selected Jewish workers were tasked to dig underground tunnels for the construction of a factory . They had no water to wash and only a weak coffee sludge to drink . When the very hard 1944/45 began many Jewish inmates died either from hunger or cold . Mr Milman saw many acts of violence by the SS who beat Jewish inmates to death on the spot . After two months the Nazis sent two groups of Jewish inmates to other camps . Mr Milman got to Kochendorf/CAMP where the concreting of floors in salt pits was commanded for an underground factory site for Messerschmitt Flugzeugwerke Aircraft Works K.W. . Here the conditions were even worse that before the Jewish inmates had to get up at 3 or 4 in the morning march from the barracks to the salt pits for an hour into which the conveyor caged were lowered to work hard in shifts of 12 hours without food . In the twilight of the salt pits the kapos pummelled them in the most brutal way . Being sent to daylight after work the Jews had to march several km . back to the camp often stand in the cold for hours during the evening roll call so we would only get the food which consisted of a thin soup a little bit of bread margarine a bit of sausage at 10 in the evening and then to go to bed at half ten which ended before the break of dawn . Under the threat of the American offensive the Nazis commanded at the beginning of 1945 the evacuation of the camp the Jewish inmates only provided with a small piece of bread were sent under SS surveillance on death marches from the salt pits to the concentration camp Dachau/CAMP while the SS commander had them carry his bed . On the march many died of exhaustion a vehicle pushed by the inmates collected the bodies and semi dead who were dumped into a mass grave a few km . on . When the survivors spent the nights in stables etc . it occurred that they – tortured by hunger – drive way pigs to subsequently voraciously devour the pig food . The death rate was so high that the SS commander eventually assumed that he would only arrive in the company of his SS men in Dachau/CAMP . Therefore he commandeered milk and raw potatoes in a village and had them distributed . The consequence was horrible because only some bothered to boil the potatoes instead of eating them raw an epidemic of dysentery broke out so that of the original 2000 Jewish inmates only 4 about 200 remained who were loaded on cattle trucks that drove the last part to Dachau/CAMP where they were – half starved – brought to get deloused and bathed to get a little bit of food afterwards . During the last time before the liberation there was no more organised work at the concentration camp Dachau/CAMP however many Jewish inmates died of hunger or by weakness . According to Mr Milman observation both the German Army as well as the SS already seemed disorganised when the SS Commando gave the command to evacuate the camp towards Seefeld/CAMP in Tyrol/CAMP in April 1945 . During the march a part of the SS did no longer keep up the surveillance some however still used weapons and Jewish inmates died as the last victims . One group which Mr Milman was part of managed to escape and to march towards the American troupes to Mittenwald/LOC in Upper/LOC Bavaria/LOC . They stayed the nights at barns and were liberated on 1 May 1945 by American troupes . Mr Milman remained provided by UNNRA at a hotel in Mittenwald/LOC until 1949 where he carried out casual work for instance in the kitchen . The Radomir Committee an ethnic aid organisation enabled him to come to Melbourne/GPE Australia/GPE in November 1949 . During the ship journey he met his future wife Livia Bluecher whom he married in May 1950 . He works successfully in the scrap material trade in his new home . 
the beginning of the year 1936 the authoress who lived in Breslau/GPE Silesia/LOC made an insulting remark about Göebbels she was denounced summoned to the Gestapo and released after three days of solitary confinement . At that time the large Jewish Community of Breslau was more annoyed than anxious and the authoress was optimistic enough to return to Germany/GPE from her trips to Czechoslovakia/GPE and Switzerland/GPE some months later . On 14 October 1936 she was summoned to the Volksgerichtshof p.3 and sentenced to nine months imprisonment for the crime of Malicious Attacks Against The Government Of The Reich . The textile manufacturers whose commercial representatives her family firm had been for 50 years were forced to give notice and the business in which Miss Lewin had been working as a partner was dissolved . Visitors able to help commercially were admitted to the prison without restriction so she could see her cousin brother in law and partner . For some weeks she was kept in the same cell as Rosa Luxembourg/GPE before her p.3 4 . The Manageress of the prison a Catholic lady who was obviously not pro Nazi behaved very friendly towards her p.4 . Her passport was confiscated by the Gestapo but after her release on 14 July 1937 she immediately applied for another in order to emigrate to some English relatives . She got it after Christmas and was allowed to take her jewels with her as well as £ 200 . Miss Fellner at Woburn House helped her to get permission for some work to do i.e. translating and interpreting for immigrants . From 1940 1943 she lived in some places in the provinces where she gave lessons . Back in London/GPE she occupied herself with teaching members of the British and American forces who wanted to learn German . 9 . Further References Non Jews helping Jews p.4 . The Dresdner Bank dismissed Jewish employee after 27 years p.2 . Nine Months In Prison For Incitement Name Lotte Lewin . Place of Birth Breslau/GPE 6th January 1892 . Area of residence before emigration Breslau/GPE . Profession In Germany/GPE Languages teacher Secretary . 1914 17 Secretary for the American consulate . Then librarian for the public library and for the law and political science faculty of the University of Breslau . Religion Jewish . Father Businessman with concerns in the textile industry . He came from the German province of Posen/LOC . Died in 1921 . Mother Without profession the daughter of a Jewish teacher she also came from the province of Posen/LOC . Died a natural death in 1934 . Following inflation the salary rate at the university worsened considerably for Lotte Lewin . So she decided in the year of 1923 to enter into the textiles business of her deceased father in order to maintain it for her mother . The company where the Lewins warehouse was situated had for years employed a Christian worker whose loyalty was doubted by no one . He was as the correspondent reported certainly no Anti Semite and as he later testified what happened was on no account an outcome of malicious intent . At the beginning of the Nazi regime everything relating to the business continued similarly as before the sales even increased further and the Christian factory owners showed no signs of Anti Semitism whatsoever . The Jewish company distributed amongst other goods a red fabric which even though it was without the swastika symbol found use as material for flags and much of it was bought by shops . At the beginning of 1936 when Goebbels was supposed to be coming to Breslau/GPE for an event Lotte Lewin referred to Goebbels as the spawn of filth and fire in a private conversation with the Christian employee who was mentioned above . The young man who did not know this quote from Faust appeared to be amused by it and related it to a lady friend whose brother was in the SA . This brother felt it was probably his duty to report it further to the Gestapo . 6 weeks after the conversation Lotte Lewin was unexpectedly summoned to the Gestapo who had their main office in the police headquarters . The people there all wore black glasses which Lotte guesses were probably to arouse yet more fear in the public . No question was asked quietly she was only screamed at . She tried to twist the comment about Goebbels by making it appear as if Goebbels 2 had applied this quote to Jews in his speech against them . She attempted to make it seem like a misunderstanding . She did not know that the young man had been interrogated in a very rough way just before her . Because of this her manoeuvre did help at all and she went directly without being able to go home in between to a remand prison where she stayed for 3 days in solitary confinement . On the second day as she was led to cross examination the young man was present . He was very cowed and uncertain as accusations were made against him that he had participated in political discussions with a Jewish lady . They tried to persuade them both that the conversation in question had been overheard how he and Lotte Lewin were suspected because of holes which Nazi neighbours had supposedly bored into their walls . But the whole thing was clearly a trick in order to try and unsettle them . On the third day L.L was released . Prior to this she had to sign a document stating that she would do nothing against the Reichsregierung and would in no way engage herself in politics . Immediately after her it was currently she went to see her sister who she met with in a synagogue . The husband of her sister was later dismissed from the Dresdner Bank commissioner after a service of 27 years . Back then in 1936 in Breslau/GPE where there was an especially large number of Jewish people living one generally seemed not to be sufficiently perturbed and viewed the whole matter of the Nazis more as a transitional period . The businesses carried on and so relatively few Jewish people emigrated . One was more angry than fearful . Lotte Lewin distinguished herself through a misguided optimism and following the experience described above even travelled for Pentecost to see friends in Czechia/LOC Gräfenberg/LOC for 10 days . She was warned there against going back to Germany/GPE however she turned back to go to Breslau/GPE . She travelled again in the August of the same year for 3 weeks to Switzerland/GPE where she stayed until the beginning of September . Because she owned a passport she could travel unhindered . From Switzerland/GPE L.L. wrote to relatives in England/GPE about her imprisonment although she clearly did not see or did not want to see the seriousness of the situation . The relatives who were aware of the German state of affairs promised her security immediately and requested that she would come to England/GPE forthwith . However she wanted for as long as she had her existence not to emigrate and be a burden to others . 3 It was arguably only when on 1st October 1936 she received a summons to appear before court on the 14th of October that she became deeply conscious of the danger in which she found herself . Finally she now wanted to leave the ownership of her passport would have made that possible especially as Breslau/GPE really was not far from the country border . Now however her relatives her brother in law and a cousin insisted on her first consulting a lawyer . He trivialised the issue and pointed out that she would probably qualify for an amnesty that had recently come out . So she stayed and went on the 14th October to her court hearing in the Volksgerichthof . It became a secret meeting all of the approx . 200 people had to leave the room . The young man to whom she had said the indiscriminate comment about Goebbels was present as a witness . He reportedly testified under oath that she was responsible for the comment . L. L. supposedly stayed with her former claim that she had only quoted the words Goebbels had expressed . The prosecuting attorney sentenced her to 2 years in jail because of incitement . The court ultimately agreed on 9 months . She was immediately led off to prison . Now she was distraught and reproached herself for not fleeing early enough . She even wanted to take her own life she made herself very ill about it . Her lawyer who came to visit her brought her back to reason . There was also a Rabbi Dr Hoffmann who came to the prison every three weeks and consoled her . Incidentally he expressed later that he could always recuperate a little when visiting her after he had seen and heard much worse elsewhere her attitude would be so positive . The business was along with her things disbanded . The manufacturers who had represented the company of Louis Lewin for more than 50 years were forced to terminate their business with Lotte Lewin and her associate . As the prison regulations gave the prisoners the right to receive visits from people who could help in matters relating to business her brother in law cousin and associate could come to her more often . She was allowed to have other types of visit only every 4 or 6 weeks . For the first 6 weeks of her imprisonment Lotte Lewin lived in a solitary confinement cell . It was same one that Rosa Luxemburg had once been within . Like her L. L. fed the birds . Though she only received insufficient food there was still more bread than she could consume . So she would place her 4 table beneath the high up window then put the chair and a stool on that so that she could climb onto them and then lay the crumbs on the windowsill . The blackbirds quickly grew used to being fed and would come early every day and in the evening and comforted the prisoners with their chirping . Atop her construction she could also look out the window at the Star of David of the nearby Synagogue at the verdigris roof of the museum also at the courtyard next door where the male prisoners did their daily walk . Amongst them to her utmost horror she also sometimes saw familiar faces . An important role was played by the directress of the prison who visited all of the cells every morning . She was a benevolent understanding lady a catholic who L. L. felt showed through her conduct not through her words that she was not pro Nazi . With her L.L could discuss specific questions and wishes . Above all she wanted to have a job however this was not possible at that time for even outside a shortage of work prevailed . She recommended that she should occupy herself in the prison library however even this was not permissible as political offenders were not allowed to work there and come into contact with other prisoners . The prisoners were only allowed to write and receive letters once a month . Only business was allowed to be sent out more often . However everything went under the censorship of the directress . She soon realised that they were not dealing with a real political prisoner here and furthermore this prisoner was commended to her by a friendly outward manner . Because of this L. L. received special permission to receive letters and write as much as she wanted . Once when the Generalstaatsanwalt was supposed to come on an inspection visit the collection of letters were picked up and kept secure by the directress herself however L.L. got them back when she left the prison . After three days L.L. was made exempt from the standing to attention when one name was called and one crime malicious attacks against the Reichsregierung identified . You know how it is done however do not forget in the case of an inspection . The head patrolwoman of the prison and her young assistants were in contrast to the directress extremely coarse and often screamed at the prisoners 5 only one was friendly and nice she was also a catholic . On the daily walks in single file all conversation was forbidden still L.L. soon learnt to like the others talk inaudibly that is to say without moving her lips and by these means she discovered much of her fellow prisoners . The prison library contained many good books even some which were no longer allowed outside under the Nazis so for example Thomas Mann books . Catholic literature was readily available . For her study L.L. busied herself primarily with English literature and English shorthand . She was also allowed to do needlework which she could send to her sister every week . One day a man from the Gestapo also again equipped with black glasses entered her cell and demanded that she would give in her passport . If the passport is not there within a week something will happen . This threat pertained to her siblings who had the passport . The prison Rabbi took it upon himself to warn her brother in law . And so her passport was handed in . On the 14th of July 1937 L.L. became free . Her relatives were awaiting her before the portal and it immediately appeared strange to them how she behaved anxiously spoke quietly looked around timidly . Upon her questioning she discovered that people from their circles who after being liberated from prison had apparently been rearrested and had been brought into KZ/CAMP . L.L. soon requested for the issuance of a new passport for the purpose of her immigration to England/GPE yet she only obtained it after Christmas . So she travelled in August to Bad/LOC Kudowa/LOC zur/LOC Kur/LOC . In prison she had lost 20 lbs during the 9 months . She had all kinds of afflictions in other ways as well . On the 3rd March she then immigrated to England/GPE . At that time she could take £ 200 and her jewellry with her . She came on the warrant of her English relatives with whom she also initially lived . However she did not have a work permit . With the financial aid of Miss Fellner of Woburn House she obtained in June 1938 the approval of the Home Office to work as a translator and interpreter for immigrants who had not mastered the English language . At the same time she was strongly involved in getting relatives and friends across which was something she attempted for about 20 cases of which a great deal were successful . In 1940 L.L. was evacuated to Whitehaven/LOC and later to Darlington/LOC and supported herself through teaching . In the Summer of 1943 she returned to London/GPE where she then gave German classes for the English and American army . 
personal report by Fritz Pagel born in 1895 in Berlin/GPE . He served in the First World War and was a textiles businessman p.3 . In 1941 he and his 17 year old son were working with Siemens in Lichtenberg/LOC . Foreman Hirsch a non Nazi was anxious to help as much as possible his Jews special Jewish department Nazi inspector decent . When taken ill for many weeks Siemens paid Pagel his wages plus sickness benefit . In 1943 when underground with family he was invited by ardent anti Nazi tailor Gustke to his cottage at Herrensee/LOC near Strausberg/LOC . Many helpful German people slater Palm lent his van for removal without a penny proprietor of a garage Wolf supplies the petrol for nothing etc . p.4 5 June 1943 flight because of denunciation . Former neighbour in Weissensee/LOC Kurt Selig shelters the whole family for three weeks . In July 1943 the family was arrested and taken to the Sammellager collective camp for deportation at Grosse/LOC Hamburgerstrasse/STREET . In August 1943 the author was transported to Auschwitz/CAMP Birkenau/CAMP ./CAMP Soon after his wife and 3 year old daughter were gassed . Pagel and son were working for the Bunawerk IG Farben in Monowitz/CAMP Auschwitz/CAMP III/CAMP where the son died of pneumonia . From February to June 1945 he was at Camp Dora/CAMP near Nordhausen/CAMP where he had to be operated on fourteen times without narcosis because of frozen fingers and hand later arm amputated . 4 . Date December 1955 . 5 . Number of pages 32 . 6 . Author or Source Fritz Pagel . 7 . Recorded by Dr. H.G. Adler . 8 . Remarks Some interesting photostatic copies documents Siemens & amp Halske and his temperature chart and medical report at Camp Dora/CAMP . P.III.h . Auschwitz/CAMP No . 198 FRITZ PAGEL The fate of one individual among many thousands Recorded by H.G. Adler Autumn 1955 . I. In Berlin/GPE 1933 1942 I was born on 30 November 1895 in Berlin/GPE and spent most of my life in that city . I enlisted in 1914 to fight in World War I and was awarded the Iron Cross Second Class . I was taken prisoner by the British in August 1918 and released in October 1919 . At the start of the Nazi period in 1933 I had been married for some years and had a nine year old son Günther . In 1940 we had a daughter Judith . I was employed in the ladieswear industry and worked at that time for a company called MOTU wholesale dealers in dresses and blouses in Kronenstrasse/STREET later Mohrenstrasse/STREET . To start with I was a travelling salesman later becoming managing director . Until 1936 I lived in Weissensee/LOC in a house that belonged to the Social Democrats and had been taken over by the German Labour Front DAF . At this point I had to leave the property and managed to find an apartment in the same district in a Jewish house in Trarbacherstrasse/STREET . After leaving elementary school in 1934 my son took up a place at grammar school but was forced to leave the following year thereafter attending the Jewish school . In 1935 I was elected onto the board of the synagogue association of Weissensee/LOC . Up until the start of 1943 services were held by Rabbi Heinz MAYER until he was sent to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . In the autumn of 1944 he died in Auschwitz/CAMP . My father died in 1937 in Berlin/GPE . My mother brother and sister escaped to London/GPE during the first half of 1939 and still live there today . In 1937/38 MOTU had a substantial turnover . We lived and worked unmolested until the November catastrophe of 1938 . I spent the evening of 9 November playing skat . On my way home there was unrest on the streets . The following morning I went to my work premises on the fifth floor of a building in Mohrenstrasse/STREET . On the way I noticed that shops had been vandalised and people were throwing rolls of fabric out of windows onto the street . I sent the Christian staff away and instructed the Jewish employees to remain inside the building and we barricaded ourselves in . Nazis tried to break in but could get to us . Apart from our premises I doubt if there was a single Jewish business in the street that escaped this orgy of destruction . In the evening I hurried home to Weissensee/LOC but then immediately returned to Mohrenstrasse/STREET where I spent three days and nights together with my brother who was also hiding there . I then ventured home once more . No one had come looking for me . Weissensee/LOC seemed to have remained relatively unscathed . My boss Hugo Schloss who had hidden in the shop fell into the hands of the Gestapo at his apartment and ended up in Sachsenhausen/CAMP . Frau Schloss asked me to liquidate the company so I sold the stock for cash at rock bottom prices . Herr Schloss was released from the concentration camp at the end of December and we completed the liquidation process together in January 1939 . Being unable to work I lived off my assets until December 1940 . During this time I tried to organise the emigration of a 2 group of people to Argentina/GPE . This was a project designed to save 100 families . The idea was for 30 people to club together to raise the sum of 5 million Reichsmark but the plan failed because no one was prepared to commit the necessary funds . All of these people were later killed . The Jewish Aid Association also refused to get involved describing the whole business as a sham . In 1939 my son was taken on as an apprentice in an ironmonger . In the winter of 1940/41 the labour exchange forced him to work clearing snow from the streets . In 1941 he tried for a job with Siemens & amp Halske . He was successful and was taken on as an unskilled labourer . He suggested I apply as well . We were both assigned to a special Jewish Department in Lichtenberg/LOC Möllendorfstrasse/LOC . A total of around 50 60 men and women aged between 16 60 worked there under a Christian foreman named Hirsch who was not a Nazi and tried as far as the situation allowed to make things easier for the Jews – all unskilled workers at the beginning . Even the Nazi guard behaved decently towards them . At the start working hours were from 7 am to 6 pm with a 45 minute break . Later there was a day shift and a night shift . The Jewish workers were given papers which allowed them to come and go and to drive . Sundays were free . In addition workers were entitled to twelve unpaid days off a year . We were trained as grinders turners and millers and also learned how to operate the drilling and punching machines Günther and I were put to work at a lathe . On the whole we adapted incredibly well and quickly to this new and unfamiliar work . During the four weeks training we were paid around 35 RM a week gross then we moved on to piecework . From our nominal wage of 48 RM we lost 15 RM in deductions for general taxes health insurance and the so called Jewish tax . This meant we only received 33 RM which was in practice the maximum you could earn because so many regular deductions were made from this nominally higher wage that you still ended up with just 33 RM . As a result I used to calculate the amount of piecework I completed so that I earned a nominal wage of exactly 48 RM . I suffered for a while from oil acne and was well provided for under the Siemens insurance scheme I even received the sick pay to which I was entitled . All was as it should be . After nine months or so my son and I were the only ones in our group to be trained as machine setters . Our job was to ensure the smooth running of the individual machines . I remained on the same wage as before however as I was not interested in a nominal increase . In the autumn of 1942 they started putting Polish civilian workers in with us in the Jewish department and we had to train them up . One lunchtime I was chatting with friends and said I have a feeling that one day all the Jewish departments will be closed down and all the Jews will be taken away . I do want to be amongst them . II . Living illegally January to July 1943 At no . 8 Trierstrasse/STREET lived a men tailor named GUSTKE with his wife and children . I knew very well that he was anti Nazi . He used to listen to foreign radio and always kept me abreast of any news . He was an ex soldier and now too old for military service which is why the Nazis employed him as a Schupo member of the security police . On a visit to him one day I told him of my fears . He replied Well . I sure you know where you are headed Herr Pagel . Gustke owned a piece of land and a cottage in Herrensee/LOC near Straussberg/LOC and he declared 3 himself happy for us to make use of it . My wife was prepared to accept his offer and we set to thinking how we could make this work . I decided first of all to continue working at Siemens until my holiday which was scheduled for the period 26 December 1942 2 January 1943 . We settled on 2 January as the day of our escape . Once my holiday had started we began moving essential items such as bed linen and clothes etc . from our apartment to Gustke place . This had to be done secretly under cover of darkness . As my holiday was due to finish Günther reported sick so that he could join us in our escape . A roofer from Weissensee/LOC Herr Palm with whom I had been in contact – he planned to take in our daughter Judith and hide her – gave us the use of his truck for our escape and our local garage owner a man named WOLF gave us free petrol . Early in the morning on 2 January Palm left Gustke place in his truck along with Günther and all our belongings . My wife took Judith with her and the two of them travelled by train . Frau Gustke and I were also on that train but sat away from the others . It was still early morning when we arrived at our destination deep snow lay on the ground . Palm truck got stuck in the road so the owner of a haulage company provided us with somewhere to store our things . Herr Palm returned to Berlin/GPE in his truck and Günther turned up with two hand sledges . The next day he and I went out with a cart to collect our belongings for whose safekeeping the woman from the haulage company refused to take any payment . Frau Gustke also returned to Berlin/GPE on that first evening . Gustke cottage stood among a group of grand dwellings in what had been woodland an hour and a half walk from Straussberg/LOC . We settled in as best we could . Gustke had given us two or three hundredweight of coal . Even the question of food had been sorted . At our apartment in Trarbacherstrasse/STREET we had had to give up a room so that it could be used by a Jewish man with a Christian wife . On our last day in Berlin/GPE I told them both of our intention to go into hiding and asked the woman to let us have four weeks worth of food coupons . She refused . But we got by without their help . The Gustkes came to see us every weekend and brought food . Sometimes we obtained more food by trading in some of my wife clothes to a woman who was head of a branch of Meyer . She was a respectable businesswoman who always gave us food without asking for coupons and only ever charged us the proper official price for other goods . We were also given bread again without coupons and at a ridiculously low price by a baker in Trarbacherstrasse/STREET called MAYER . Günther and I took it in turns to pick it up when we went into town . However our diet consisted mainly of potatoes and sour skimmed milk which I was given by a farmer in a neighbouring village in exchange for work . He had no idea who I was . The Gustkes never took a single penny for all that they did for us . I kept their property in good order and tidied up their untended garden . One of our neighbours a friend of Gustkes suspected that there was something not right about us but said nothing . His wife was of Lorrainian origin and therefore had French sympathies whereas his mother was high up in the National Socialist Women League . I also tended this neighbour garden and he paid me with generous amounts of food . Also neighbours were the WOLFF family who – unfortunately – my son befriended . In her earlier years Frau Wolff had worked as a servant for a Jewish family and she became suspicious of us living there under the name of Lehmann and without any papers . 4 One day the Women League leader said to me Frau Wolff maintains that you are Jews but I told her that ca be TRUE because the Lehmanns read the Völkischer Beobachter . In response I threatened legal action but this woman talked me out of it . Herr Gustke was having a well dug on his land and the well builder took Günther and me on as unskilled labourers without demanding any papers . Helping us was a 15 year old Russian Ostarbeiter forced labourer from the East/LOC . We were paid 2.6 Reichsmarks an hour and the work took about four weeks . And so the months went past and life was tolerable until one Sunday in June 1943 the Gustkes and I decided to go into the woods to look for strawberries . On our return my wife told me that a police officer had called asking for me and my son . Apparently he had said Do take this the wrong way but are you sure you not Jewish ? My wife denied it and the policeman went away but not before he had asked for Gustke to come and speak to him that afternoon . Gustke duly went along returning with the message that the official wanted to see both my and Günther employment records within the next 8 days . This ominous change in our fortunes came as a result of our sycophantic and malevolent neighbour Frau Wolff loose tongue . On the following Friday night we set off for Berlin/GPE Ostkreuz/LOC station/LOC with just a few essential items to our name arriving early the next morning . We had no idea what to do next but then I remembered a phone number I had been given . In summer 1942 we had had a visit from one Kurt SELIG and his wife and daughter . The Seligs had lived in the same house as us in Trierstrasse/STREET for many years and wanted to know how we were doing . As they left Herr Selig had said If you ever find yourself in difficulty and need my help just remember my number – but do write it down . So I phoned the Seligs who lived by then – as they still do today in Werner Voss Damm 20 Tempelhof/LOC . We were given a warm welcome and food to eat for which the Seligs refused payment . If Herr Selig had to leave the house early he would leave us 20 cigarettes . Unfortunately staying with them was not a long term solution as it was too cramped so after 3 weeks we had to leave that temporary refuge . Our son was able to stay with friends while we moved around without any fixed abode even camping out in Grunewald/LOC forest at one point . Whenever we were all together in the street I would always make Günther keep his distance from us . III . From Berlin/GPE to Monowitz/LOC July 1943 We continued to lead this precarious nomadic life until the beginning of July when we were stopped near Berlin/GPE town hall by a plain clothes police inspector arrested and taken to the transit camp in Grosse/LOC Hamburgerstrasse/STREET . My son who had witnessed the arrest was able to escape unnoticed . It being Saturday afternoon there were no SS in the transit camp so we escaped interrogation and punishment . We were given a room and decent food . At that point there were around 200 prisoners in the camp mostly people in the same situation as us i.e. had attempted to live illegally . Many of us knew of Jewish informants living in the transit camp including a Dr. JACOBSOHN . Dr Jacobsohn who had practised in Schönhauser Strasse thought his underhand dealings would mean his family 5 would be saved but in the end he went down the same route as all the others and was gassed at Auschwitz/CAMP . These informants roamed the streets during the day without wearing the obligatory Star of David intent on catching Jewish looking passers by . Jacobsohn recognised a former patient of his a dyed blonde and handed her over to the police . The man had no choice but to take the woman to Grosse Hamburgerstrasse/STREET saying to her on the way What pigs they are ! But unfortunately I ca let you go otherwise I end up in prison myself . One day a Jewish man at the assembly point threw himself out of a third floor window and landed in the middle of the street . One evening three days after our arrival the doors opened and our son entered the room . He had handed himself in . I was beside myself and remonstrated loudly with him but in the end I held my tongue when he explained Papa where you go I go . Those who were capable were put to work but only the men . I was assigned to a group responsible for preparing the building occupied by the Higher Institute for Jewish Studies in Artillerie Strasse for use by the Gestapo we did all the painting . While we were there it was often possible to get away for a time and so we could meet up with Frau Selig who brought us cigarettes . During those evenings we kept ourselves entertained by playing cards etc . At the beginning of August 1943 a transport was put together of 99 men women and children – the youngest was just 6 months old – and I was put in charge . We took food for everybody I recall it consisted of two loaves of bread per person plus we took flour and salt . We had heard that every time a transport arrived at Auschwitz/CAMP from Berlin/GPE there was bread soup to eat . Early in the morning on 3 August we were taken on trucks to a station – it might have been Jungfernheide . At the same time Goebbels had issued an order that Christian hospitals were to be evacuated because of air attacks . The entire transport and their luggage were loaded into two closed cattle trucks which were then coupled to a passenger train bound for Silesia/LOC . The accompanying SS officers travelled separately . One of the wagons remained locked throughout the journey the other was opened at certain stations . The closed wagon contained all those who had attempted to escape including many who had fled from prison camps even Auschwitz/CAMP . While in the transit camp these absconders were held in a cell and had to be taken to the toilet by guards . Our two wagons were uncoupled in Kattowitz/CAMP Katowice/CAMP and then taken on to Birkenau/CAMP where we arrived at about 8 in the evening . We were met by SS who told us we were being taken to a labour camp – more details were not forthcoming . We were made to clean out the wagons and then we were loaded onto trucks and taken to a former stable in the camp . Here we stayed all together until around 11 pm . We were then led out in two columns men in one and women and children in the other and told to move towards a truck with its headlights blazing . Between them stood an SS officer . The men sent left and the women sent right were being despatched to their deaths . Those left behind numbered around 20 25 men and … women . The men women and children selected were taken off to a red building . The following day I learned that this was the gas chamber . Among 6 those poor victims were my wife and our little Judith . Once the selection process was over those of us men who had been spared were taken to a barrack where we were made to undress . We were ordered to file past an SS officer with our arms above our heads and fingers apart during which my wedding ring was removed . We were then taken to the sauna block and forced under the shower before having our heads and all other bodily hair shaved off . We were then herded into a large hall where our personal details were recorded and we each had our prisoner number tattooed into our left arm . My number was 135396 . We were issued with civilian clothing a jacket and trousers but no underwear and not even basic wooden clogs or a hat . In this miserably inadequate get up we looked like the worst kind of criminals . It took all night to get through this whole process . At around dawn we were taken to our accommodation block where they left us in peace for the rest of that first day . The following morning we were taken off barefoot as we were to man the tipper trucks at the gravel pit . We were not mistreated but we saw girls also in their bare feet having to drag ten heavy bricks at a time and being beaten all the while by SS women with canes . A few days later a call went out from the Bunawerk factory in Monowitz/GPE Auschwitz/CAMP III for carpenters mechanics lathe operators and other skilled workers . Günther and I applied to work as lathe operators . Altogether they took on around 100 men 15 of whom had arrived on the same transport as me . They took us first of all to Auschwitz/CAMP I where we were bathed disinfected and kitted out with the now familiar zebra suit . This time we were also given undergarments a cap and a pair of wooden clogs . The SS then marched us on foot to Monowitz/CAMP keeping us in line with blows from their rifle butts . My feet were soon rubbed raw from the ill fitting shoes hence my decision to walk most of the route in bare feet . IV . Monowitz August 1943 January 1945 On arrival in Monowitz/CAMP we were once again put through the whole bathing and dressing procedure as it seemed to be the custom for prisoners to have to wear different things after every bath . We were quartered in a vast tent fitted out with hundreds of triple bunks . Everything was scrupulously clean but we were not welcome as so called preventive detention SV prisoners ruled the roost and they treated us badly . After about two days I was admitted to the hospital suffering from enteritis and so was separated from my son . Even after my discharge a further three days went by without my seeing him . But when one of the work details was in need of mechanics we both put ourselves forward and so were reunited . This ‘ Kommando 109 was led by a Kapo called Erich and was made up of between 50 and 60 men mostly Polish Jews and some German Jews . This work detail was known for its cleanliness . Erich men were expected to keep themselves scrupulously clean and tidy but he took good care of them . On joining this detail we were moved into decent barracks . The block elder was a decent Polish Jew . He was particularly kind to Günther giving him extra helpings 7 of food over a period of many weeks to keep him in good health . Furthermore Erich also made sure there was always sufficient food . He managed this because in addition to our work detail there were also musicians living in our barracks who enjoyed special status . Among them were Poles Germans and Dutchmen the choirmaster was a gypsy who was also an excellent violinist . We spent several months in Kommando 109 until one time we were caught organising i.e. stealing bread . Erich was not happy about this and we were removed from his detail . Unfortunately Günther was then moved to a much tougher Kommando as a result of which he ended up contracting double pneumonia . One Monday he was admitted to hospital . I managed to get permission to visit him on the following Thursday . I had no idea what was wrong with him he just lay there drenched in sweat feeling thoroughly wretched . He said to me Papa I wo be around much longer . I contradicted him with as much conviction as I could muster . On the Saturday two days later I too was admitted to hospital with a lung infection and found myself in the room next to Günther . I was in such a state that I did even ask after my son . Sometime later a selection took place . Being an old soldier I knew what to do . After three weeks I was discharged . When I returned to my barracks I was greeted by a comrade who said to me Did you know your son died ? I did believe him and went straight to the office . They told me that Günther had been transferred to Auschwitz/CAMP I/CAMP camp as was usual when a patient had been sick for longer than six weeks . I did not trust this information and tried to get further confirmation but without success . It was until last year that I learned that my son had succumbed to his pneumonia in the prisoners hospital in Monowitz/CAMP on 17 January 1944 . By May 1944 I had been admitted to hospital twice more first with pleurisy and then with yet another lung infection . During that time I survived another SS selection . In order to report sick you had to have a temperature of 38 degrees or have visible wounds . You first had to report to the block elder and then to the camp hospital . On one occasion I had a large festering wound on the back of my heel . It was treated not by doctors but by medical orderlies who cut out the sore using scissors and a knife – no anaesthetic or antiseptic . Injuries like these were treated as outpatient cases and there was no being signed off from work . If the prison doctor needed to examine you you were required to strip off completely . The food in the hospital was not bad there was even a convalescent diet consisting of for example sweetened semolina or rice soup . During the period from summer 1943 to autumn 1944 I would say the mortality rate was not especially high . I shall now attempt a short general description of everyday life in Monowitz/CAMP . We were wakened at 5 am by someone banging on an iron bar . We had to get up immediately and make our beds . There were usually two men to each bed . The barracks were meant to hold 120 130 men but actually accommodated 260 prisoners or more . We kept the barracks very clean . Most people had just the one blanket to sleep under . With no toiletries or towels – we used our jackets to dry ourselves – it was only possible to have a rudimentary wash . There was plenty of water but it was drinkable . The toilets were made deliberately insalubrious so as to discourage prisoners from lingering too long . After washing we were given what they called coffee and our daily food ration 8 of 250 300 grams of bread . In addition we received a small amount each of margarine sausage cheese or jam during the course of the week . After breakfast came roll call . We had to line up in our work details and were then led off one by one to our workplaces outside the camp . It was rare for anything too awful to happen during these daily routines . A wind band played as we left the camp at 6 am and again when we returned home in the evening . It took us about half an hour on average to reach our workplace . We started work at 7 am had an hour for lunch then worked through until 6 pm in the summer or until it got dark in the winter . You either helped in construction work on the Bunawerk factory which was constantly being enlarged or else in the individual workshops . The German civilian workers with whom we came into contact were reserved towards us . During the lunch break we were given what was known as Buna soup which was made mainly from the leaves of turnips nettles etc . At the end of the day there was a head count of each individual work detail and we usually arrived back at the camp by 7 pm . Evening roll call lasted between one and four hours . Afterwards we were each given a litre of passably good soup made from beans etc . In summer we had to be in our barracks by 9.30pm and lights out was at 10 . In winter when our barracks was connected up to the Buna plant heating system the lights were turned off at 9.3 . On alternate Sundays we were not required to work although there could be as many as men picked out by the barrack functionaries and the Kapos for punishment and they did have to work . If you did find yourself with free time you would actually be left in peace and could do what you wanted within the constraints of the camp . There was often sweetened tea on Sunday evenings . Monowitz/CAMP camp was built at the end of February / beginning of March 1942 and held an average of 10 prisoners . The number of inmates never went below . During the time I was there there were still some of the original cohort of prisoners . The youngest inmates were 15 or 16 years old the oldest around 50 there was the odd prisoner who was even older but these were very rare . As many as 80 % of those in the camp were Jewish . Until 1944 most were from Poland/GPE and just a handful from Germany/GPE . Then in much lower numbers came French and Dutch Jews . Their morale was generally speaking very low and their attitude toward the other Jews was hostile . Autumn 1944 saw the arrival of a large transport of Hungarian Jews who were in excellent physical health and well nourished . This meant however that they found it hard to cope with the privations of camp life and the majority of them soon perished . Arriving at the same time as the Hungarian Jews were a few individuals from Theresienstadt/GHETTO . I knew one of them from Weissensee/CAMP . He had previously worked in a cemetery . Although half Jewish by descent he was not officially recognised as a Mischling i.e. of mixed blood because he was married to a Jew . His wife and child were killed shortly after their arrival in Auschwitz/CAMP . This same man also told me of the demise of other acquaintances who had been deported with him from Theresienstadt/GHETTO including our rabbi Heinz MAYER and his wife . About a fifth of the inmates were Aryan Germans and Poles in equal number . The German contingent was made up of prisoners of all stripes from political detainees to Jehovah Witnesses . The overwhelming majority however were SV Sicherheitsverwahrte prisoners i.e. career criminals 9 most held positions as camp functionaries . The way the Germans behaved towards the Jews varied between individuals . Most of the Poles were political prisoners and refused on the whole to speak German . They used to receive parcels containing the finest delicacies . The Poles were mostly hostile towards the Jews and hated those who spoke only German Jews who spoke Polish had less to fear . As the end of the war approached the Jews were more terrified of the Poles hatred than they were of SS reprisals . There were many different work details e.g. cement carriers this was a particularly gruelling Kommando led by an infamous Kapo carpenters and joiners welders turners etc . there was also a detail who worked in offices requisitioning the required numbers of skilled workers for the Buna factory . There were considerable social differences within the camp . For example the Kapos musicians and other privileged groups had the tailor alter their prisoner uniforms for a better fit . Normal inmates rarely had any undergarments etc . whereas all the functionaries from room elders upwards seemed to have no problem getting their hands on underwear socks toiletries etc . Over time I gained experience in several different work details with varying amounts of success . Gradually I learned what it took to stay alive in the camp and how important it was for prisoners to help and protect each other e.g. so that no one individual had to labour too hard or go without sleep . By the end of 1944 I had become so crafty that I was often able to ‘ skive off just as the detail was preparing to leave for work . One time I feigned a fall and limped back to the camp as if I had sprained my foot . I reported to the hospital and at first the doctor did not want to examine me but then he changed his mind . But as soon as he went near my foot I screamed loudly . This was my way of getting myself 8 10 days convalescence . Experienced prisoners contrived various methods by which to organise i.e. steal valuable items such as lamps and tools from the factory and smuggle them into the camp even though spot checks were carried out on leaving for the factory and on return to the camp . Anything that you managed to secrete into the camp had to be kept concealed until a suitable ‘ customer was found who would pay for the goods with soup bread or other rationed items in quantities that were in line with normal camp prices . So for example in exchange for a lamp I received extra soup for a whole month . Sometimes even whole engines would be ‘ traded i.e. sold by prisoners to civilian workers for cash . But this type of transaction could only be carried out by Bonzen privileged prisoners with the help of their friends . During the early months of my time in Monowitz/CAMP the punishment for anyone caught doing this kind of business or indeed committing any other kind of ‘ offence was to be tied to a whipping block in front of the other prisoners and given 10 20 lashes . Many prisoners died as a direct result of this mistreatment . An order later went out for these punishments to stop and for the offenders to instead be locked in the punishment cell . From time to time there were escape attempts . During my time in the camp four or five of these escapees were recaptured and hanged on the camp parade ground again in full view of all the other inmates . These hangings carried out by prisoners specially selected for the task were done in such a way that the victims did not die immediately 10 but suffered a slow death due to the knot in the noose being positioned to one side . The bodies were still twitching after ten minutes . I can clearly recall the last such execution which took place at Christmas 1944 . A large tree had been erected in the camp decorated with electric lights . The recaptured prisoners were three young lads and they were hanged simultaneously . With the noose already round his neck one of them shouted Chin up comrades we are the last ! One work free Sunday in August 1944 I was appointed as foreman of a group that was chosen to go into the factory . While there we were taken by surprise by an daytime air attack the bombs so well targeted that the whole works – soon to start production of synthetic rubber – was completely destroyed . We had no proper shelters and took refuge in various buildings . The number of dead and injured prisoners was small . I sustained three splinters to the lower part of my left leg but they were only flesh wounds which earned me 14 days convalescence . There was substantial damage to the buildings and the factory had to be shut down . In the weeks following the only work to do was clearing the place up . One bomb fell onto the road running through the camp but caused no damage while another hit the nearby British prisoner of war camp killing 37 inmates . In the summer of 1944 I was assigned to a work detail as a mechanic working alongside British prisoners of war . Both sides were forbidden to talk to each other on pain of death . As far as possible the British were friendly towards us although there were some anti semites among them . One particularly decent chap was Gunner Arthur HAMPTON from Manchester/LOC who treated me like a brother . It was common knowledge that the British did like their food ration which consisted of six pieces of round Harzer cheese . Hampton brought me what amounted to about 8 rations 48 pieces without expecting anything in return . As a result of my time as a prisoner of war I was able to speak English and so it came about that Hampton offered to help me make contact with my family in England/GPE . He sent Red Cross letters direct to my brother in London/GPE from which the latter could glean that I was still alive while at the same time using clever phrasing to prevent the censors realising that this letter was from a concentration camp inmate . After a few weeks I joined a different Kommando which meant I lost touch with Hampton . Then winter came around and I found myself having to work outside clad only in thin clothes . I heard nothing from my Englishman for six months . One day I was standing on a clay hill when I saw him suddenly appear waving to me . I dropped my spade pretended to stumble and rolled down the slope . Hampton said I got a letter for you . Despite the risk of death for both of us we met in the toilet block having left the ranks and gone off site and Hampton quickly handed me the letter . I hid it away then once back at the camp I read it through several times before handing it back to Hampton . If they had found the letter on me I would have been hanged . I never saw Hampton again but I did correspond with him in England/GPE after the war was over . In Monowitz/CAMP I met a former close acquaintance from Berlin/GPE Weissensee a metalworker called Peisachowitz who had worked for many years training up other metalworkers . Aged 60 Peisachowitz was among the oldest camp inmates and his specialist knowledge and skills meant he had a relatively pleasant job . He helped me a great deal and acquired food 11 for me which helped to keep me going . The last time I spoke to Peisachowitz was on the evacuation march to Gleiwitz/CAMP in January 1945 but sadly I heard later that he had died . We were relatively well informed about political and military events . Our mood in the camp alternated between optimism and pessimism . In conversation with a German civilian worker following the attempt on Hitler life in July 1944 I was asked If the situation changes and we end up losing the war what will you Jews do to us ? I answered Nothing at all because it not your fault . Leaving aside whether my answer would turn out to be right or wrong at that time my survival instinct meant I could have said anything different . In the autumn of 1944 the situation deteriorated further . We heard that the Russians were approaching and would be in Cracow/GPE by Christmas . We had no idea what they would do to us and could not discount the possibility that we would be gassed . The weeks went by amid great uncertainty until the day arrived when we were confronted by the facts . V. Evacuation of Monowitz Dora On 18 January 1945 I remembered it was my aunt birthday and also Reichsgründungstag German Empire Day we were standing on the parade ground when they told us we would no longer be going off to work but were to be evacuated . Everyone was allowed to take their personal belongings with them which amounted to very little . We were each given a loaf of bread and a piece of sausage . At about 12 we marched off in the direction of Gleiwitz/CAMP . We spent the first night in a brickworks where some individuals managed to hide in some straw and so escape having to march any further . The rest of us had to move on the following morning . I was accompanied part of the way by a Berlin/GPE SS officer who urged me to keep going anyone lagging behind was shot . He even gave me two cigarettes . We spent the second night in a small camp just outside Gleiwitz/CAMP which was so crowded that I and many others were forced to sleep outside in the snow . It was until the following morning that I managed to climb through a window into a barrack building and warm myself up a bit in what was a crowded space . I lost my package of bread while I was there . We had been given hardly any food as we marched in Gleiwitz/CAMP there was at least morning coffee . On the afternoon of 20 January 140 of us were loaded into open coal wagons and then given more bread . We had no idea where we were being taken . We learned along the way that several other camps had refused to take us in due to overcrowding . Our journey lasted ten days and nine nights and we were given no more food during that time . We stopped regularly in the middle of nowhere in order to let other trains pass but only twice pulled into a station where civilians hearing our desperate pleas for water tried to throw snowballs to us . 12 That was our only nourishment . But it was long before the SS men stopped even these modest attempts at kindness while themselves enjoying something to eat at both stations and sipping hot drinks right in front of us . We on the other hand were busy removing the many dead amongst us from the wagons dragging them along the platform before loading them into the carriages at the back of the train . We had tried to dispose of the corpses at night by throwing them onto the track . When the SS found out it was announced that anyone putting their head or a hand outside the wagon would be shot . We had to go to the toilet in these wagons . While we were travelling in these dreadful conditions the likes of which it is impossible to imagine the SS sat in passenger carriages taking it in turn to go and do guard duty in the brake vans attached to the freight wagons . Sometimes we came across transports of women who seemed to be no better off than us . A few of our number had empty food tins which they let down on pieces of string in order to gather snow as we went along . People fought each other over this precious resource which was distributed by the spoonful . As space in my wagon increased somewhat as a result of so many people having died two warring factions emerged – for no apparent reason . There were many on both sides who had lost all reason and set about attacking each other . Barely half the prisoners in our wagon survived this transport . Anyone who tried to sit down was done for as others would sit on top of him and he would end up being suffocated . It is impossible to judge the way people behaved during this journey against any normal human standards as it was dictated entirely by blind instinct for which there was no accounting . I found out later that of the men loaded onto our train in Gleiwitz/CAMP on 20 January only were still alive when we arrived in Nordhausen/LOC on 30 January . But even those who had survived were by no means saved many died later of exhaustion or the consequences of it while others suffered permanent damage from frostbite . VI . At Dora/CAMP camp February to June 1945 We were unloaded in Nordhausen/CAMP . Those who were still able to move had to drag the most exhausted prisoners into Dora/CAMP camp . I was given a comrade to carry but I was so weak that I could not bear his weight and could scarcely move myself . Once in the camp we were fed straight away and then assigned to different barracks I was fortunate enough to end up in a decent one . It had something I had not seen for a very long time – decent washrooms and flushing toilets . In the evening we handed over the filthy rags we were wearing were showered and then – naked and still dripping wet – we were led across the camp main street to be issued with underclothes trousers a jacket and shoes . The following morning we had to stand around for hours in the freezing cold to be registered I was given prisoner number 106217 . Then they took us back to the barracks . The 13 food in Dora/CAMP camp was much better than it had ever been in Monowitz/CAMP . Once a fortnight we received double rations of bread . I was unable to work at first due to the pain from my frostbitten hands I also managed sometimes to skive off . Later on I applied for relatively easy work as a turner in the underground factory . My frostbitten fingers on both hands were treated as an outpatient case . One time while I was working at the lathe the foreman noticed pus dripping from my bandage into the machine and sent me away immediately . I had to stop work and report to the hospital that evening to have my dressings changed . But when I got there I was immediately admitted and put into the Jewish ward where patients slept two to a bed . The following morning the camp doctor amputated the little finger on my right hand under general anaesthetic . That was in in February . Three days after the operation I developed heavy swelling on the back of my right hand and on my lower arm near the wrist . At first they treated it with cold compresses but when it did improve they made incisions – without either general or local anaesthetic – on the top and bottom of my hand . They repeated this same treatment fourteen times over a period of seven weeks using razors and serrated scissors on my hand and arm – without any form of anaesthesia . If I cried out from the intolerable pain of this ‘ treatment a Polish medical orderly would hit me round the face . As a result of the procedures my temperature always went sky high and I was totally unable to sleep . On 23 March the doctor decided to amputate my right arm and I was given the news in the morning . I was told to report to the infirmary naked at 3 pm and told to lie on a table where an anaesthetic injection was administered . When I woke up the next morning both my arm and the pain were gone . I felt a great relief and asked for something to eat . On the second day I had to have my dressing changed . For some time after that I was given medical attention every two days . I found out later that the amputation had been done badly they left 8 cm more flesh than bone which was left to heal by itself without the use of a clamp which meant I ended up with a scar that resembled a sunflower . In the first few days of April rumours started to circulate that the Americans were approaching and that the camp was to be evacuated which indeed it was on 6 April . Only the patients in the camp hospital were to remain behind . On the afternoon of that day the doctor went to each individual barracks to see who was physically able to march and I was deemed to be one of those capable . However I was determined not to go . Despite my name being called several times I refused to leave the camp . 14 of my comrades who were also meant to be leaving and had been given clothes turned back lay down on their beds and pulled their blankets up to their chins . Nobody bothered us any further even when the room elder 14 an anti semitic Christian orderly from Berlin/GPE came back into the ward a short time later he took no action against the 14 who had refused to leave . A total of 600 patients plus doctors and nurses stayed behind in Dora/CAMP camp . On 7 April the SS moved out and we were unguarded . Our only concern now was food but there were supplies . I have no idea where they came from . We later found out that a raiding party Rollkommando made up of armed SS men had arrived on 9 April but that a German army major who had taken over supervision of the camp refused anyone entry which probably saved our lives . For four days we existed in a kind of no man land until on 11 April at 6.30pm we were liberated by American troops . Led by our Berlin/GPE orderly who described us as his special patients four tall soldiers entered our Jewish ward and greeted us with the words You do have to speak English it fine to speak Yiddish ! The next day some uniformed American war reporters arrived I saw that one of them was a woman and addressed her as Madam . We got along well . German doctors and nursing staff were commandeered to Dora/LOC from a captured military hospital . However many former prisoners still perished because they were so weak and were unable to tolerate the good food they were given . Already in the first few days we were given forms on which to fill in our personal details . Under nationality I wrote English . We thought the whole world was open to us . My arm healed slowly . After a fortnight I was moved to another barracks where the German chief medical officer wanted to discharge me as fully recovered . Despite my stubborn reluctance to this I had no choice but to report to the specified quarters but not before going to see the Dutch camp doctor I had been under previously . He intervened on my behalf and succeeded in getting me sent back to the hospital where incidentally a few individual sick German prisoners of war had been cared for . As my arm stump had begun to suppurate I was operated on again and then moved to a large barracks known as the TB barracks . Here there were 60 former prisoners looked after by a Pole a decent man assisted by German orderlies . Every time we had an Allied visitor to the hospital to monitor how things were going they would be directed to me as I was the only one among the patients able to communicate in fluent English . As a result I was well looked after . In May during one such visit I asked an Englishwoman to let my sister know that I had survived this she was able to do through a friend of hers who lived in London/GPE . In just a short time the empty main camp had filled up again with displaced persons often whole families . 15 VII . In Belgium/GPE June October 1945 In mid June we were told that all those who were citizens of western countries should prepare to be transported home . As I had registered as an Englishman I was counted among this group and managed moreover to ensure that my young friend Wolf was also able to join us . He had lost his whole family apart from an uncle in America/GPE . We were still dressed in our zebra suits . As there was no civilian clothing available they gave us German uniforms to put on . I was given a set of women clothes of which only the jacket was usable which meant I had to continue wearing my striped trousers . We assembled on 8 June and were boarded onto trucks and taken to Nordhausen/LOC station . Here we were transferred onto an American hospital train and taken to Lüttich/CAMP Liège/CAMP where we received a rapturous welcome from the local people . They took us by truck to a school . The Belgians among whom there were a number of voluntary foreign workers and collaborators were separated from us . A Belgian nurse approached my friend Wolf and explained that she was very sorry but he had to go as being German he would be arrested . I pointed out that although Wolf had been born in Germany/GPE he was Jewish . The nurse asked why we had said that in the first place . And with that the matter was settled . The following day I got talking to a Belgian Jewish female doctor who urged me to go to Brussels/GPEwhere I would be looked after by the Jewish Community there . When I asked how on earth I was going to get to Brussels/CAMP she reassured me that I could leave this problem to her . I was given essential toiletries at a Red Cross post and shortly afterwards was driven to Brussels/GPEin a private car in the company of a Belgian woman a former inmate of Ravensbrück/CAMP and a former Polish officer . Wolf stayed in Lüttich/LOC but after repeated pleas from me he too was moved to Brussels/GPEa few days later . On 15.6.45 I was taken to the British Centre which was based in an artillery barracks and there I stayed for a few weeks . The food was fantastic . I was brought before the British Consul where I requested permission to go to England/GPE . This he politely declined as I had no proof of British nationality . There were people in the Centre who were pretending to be Commonwealth citizens or Americans . Of course there were all kinds of dubious characters among them many of whom were no more British than I was . I was desperate to get to England/GPE at any cost and decided to contact my family in London/GPE . As there was no way the British Consul could single handedly deal with all the research that had to be done they appointed a Vice Consul who operated within the camp itself . One day I was summoned to see him . He received me with great courtesy and spoke to me at first in English but then suddenly explained in excellent German It would be better if we spoke German as every word counts . I told him a long story but to give the man his due he soon realised that it did ring TRUE . 16 In the end he said he could help me . Eight days later I was discharged from the British Centre and handed over to the Belgians – like many others in my situation . Although things were not so good as when I was with the British it was perfectly adequate . My arm was now fully healed but the flap of skin – about 8 cm too long – annoyed me . A friend advised me to go St Pierre Hospital to have the arm re operated on . I went to see the doctor at the Jewish Aid Committee who had helped me out previously and was recommended for referral to the hospital in question . It was not until 2 August two weeks later that I was actually admitted . A successful re amputation was carried out two days later . I ended up staying in hospital until 10 October as I came down with another lung infection in the middle of September . During that time I was visited once or twice a week by a lady from the Jewish Aid Committee who brought me gifts . In the meantime my family in London/GPE had also been busy and had gone to great lengths to acquire a visa for me . I was issued with a visa stamp on my Belgian travel documents which I at first hesitated to sign because they said Nationality German . I then headed to the British Centre where a female captain recognised me straight away and asked whether I wanted to travel to England/GPE by plane or by boat . I decided to fly and this was soon organised . I was even given British repatriation papers . On 12 October 1945 I landed at Croydon/LOC airport . 17 SIEMENS & amp HALSKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT Herr Fritz Pagel 1 Berlin/GPE W Kurfürstendamm 217 Hotel Pension Adler Your ref Your message dated Our ref ➀ BERLIN/LOC SIEMENSSTADT Dr. Schl / Ba . Date 14.1.54 Re Dear Herr Pagel With regard to your visit of the 7th of this month and following discussion with the signatories on the right we are pleased to inform you that from the documentation that still exists relating to your case we are able to provide definitive confirmation of your earnings during your period of employment in our company . On entering the firm on 16.12.40 you worked first as a machine operator and later from mid December 1941 as an assistant machine setter . Your earnings were in line with wage levels at that time . There were no payments made below that level . We had no influence over any deductions made in accordance with prevailing laws or paid to competent authorities . In light of this the company can not be said to have profited from your forced labour and is therefore unfortunately unable to accept any claim to compensation for damages as these were not caused by the company . Yours faithfully SIEMENS & amp HALSKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT Hoffmann Schlitzberger 18 7 Elgin Mansions Elgin/STREET Avenue/STREET London/GPE W.9 Berlin/GPE Siemensstadt 5.8.1953 SIEMENS SIEMENS & amp HALSKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT Certificate of Leaving Employment This is to confirm that between 16 December 1940 and 8 January 1943 Herr Fritz Pagel born 30.11.95 in Berlin/GPE was employed in our company first as a machine operator and then from 15.12.41 as an assistant machine setter . During this period he was insured by the Betriebskrankenkasse der Vereinigten Siemenswerke . SIEMENS & amp HALSKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT Central Wages Office 19 TBC ABT 39A Dora/CAMP Camp 5.6.45 . Certificate This is to certify that since 23.2.45 former prisoner no . 106217 Fritz Pagel has been undergoing treatment in Dora/CAMP camp hospital for frostbite injuries to both hands sustained during his time in the concentration camp and for the subsequent amputation of his right arm . He will require further hospital treatment once he is discharged from the camp . 21 illegible 22 illegible 23 illegible 24 News Chronicle 1947 ? These are the Dregs of Europe Ghettoes photograph The Editor of the News Chronicle yesterday received the following letter your readers may like to see those two dregs of the ghettoes . They are my sister children who together with their mother were gassed in Auschwitz/CAMP exactly a year ago after two years of famine epidemics and ill treatment in Terezin/CAMP . Their crime was the supreme one of being non Aryans . L.H. The writer refers to the statement by Major Winwood . Kramer defence counsel that the concentration camps came to contain the dregs of the ghettoes of Middle/LOC Europe/LOC . LATER a News Chronicle reporter went to see the writer of the letter — a woman . Czechoslovak by birth and of Jewish extraction . Her husband is a doctor at an English university . She does not want her identity disclosed in case relatives in Europe/LOC should suffer . Not that she has many relatives left . Twenty members of her family including her sister and her sister two children whose photographs appear above perished in Nazi/CAMP concentration camps . This is the story she told of these two children My sister Mrs. Susan S. lived happily with her husband a lawyer and their two young children Oldrich aged eight and a half and Marie aged five in Prague/GPE until the of the Nuremberg/LOC illegible in 1939 . that they were illegible of all privileges and humiliated in every possible way . Soon after the Germans entered Prague/GPE they deported all Jews to concentration camps in Poland/GPE and my sister and her husband and their two children were among those taken away . Mr. S. was soon separated from his wife and family and sent to work as a coal miner in Upper/LOC Silesia/LOC but escaped . In a letter written on June 22 from Prague/GPE to his sister in law Mr. S. says that he has since his return met several men who have come back from Auschwitz/CAMP . They told him that all the women and children who were taken there in the same transport of cattle trucks as his wife and children were put to death in the gas chambers . Eighty thousand were taken there he says and only a handful have so far returned . I have long since ceased to hope that Susan might be alive . 
spite of their Turkish nationality the author and his wife were arrested in their lodgings in  Amsterdam/GPE on 22 September 1943 . This report includes details on the ‘ Centre For Jewish Emigration Joodsche Schouwburg and Westerbork/CAMP description in detail . The author and his wife departed to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP in January 1944 together with about refugees . Ill treatment starvation diseases death rate 25 40 daily increasing later . In June 1944 the author was transferred to the so called Schneebaum Lager later Aufenthaltslager Benadon for Jews of neutral nationality p.6 . Here were only 250 refugees instead of a in the common camp Albala/CAMP camp in which conditions were much worse especially after Albala/CAMP dismissal when a Christian Hanke assisted by Christian Kapos took over p.7 . From January 1945 many thousand prisoners arrived from other camps all in a pitiable state p.7 . 105 persons belonging to the Turkish group were released on 4 March 1945 . They went to Sweden/GPE via Luebeck/LOC where they met with the group from Ravensbruck/CAMP and the Turkish students . On 10 April the author arrived in Istanbul/GPE . 8 . References Dr. Pick from Vienna/GPE doctor at the quarantine at Westerbork/CAMP p.15 . Camp Commander at Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP Haas p.4 . JPA Jewish Press Agency i.e. the rumours reported in the camp p.5 . Cultural life in Neutrals Camp lectures studies reading p.6 7 no forced labour p.6 . 9 . Remarks See related report by the same author report No . 294b . for further information . Bergen Belsen After having been spared for a long time from home raids and street checks on account of our Turkish papers my wife and I we had left my daughter Malkitta with Aryans from the Netherlands/GPE in the provincial town of Helmond/LOC under the name of Rietje/LOC were taken away by two plain clothed Dutch policemen . According to them we were being taken to a hearing at the Zentralstelle für jüdische Auswanderung Central Department for Jewish Emigration at Adama von Schletemaplein in  Amsterdam/GPE with a view to a speedy return . We had been given permission to keep a packed suitcase with Jewish neighbours which would potentially be forwarded to the Westerbork/CAMP camp . In the meantime the authorities allowed us to enjoy our breakfast . We went by foot to the nearest police station . There we were put in a truck and taken to the Zentralstelle . There we had to wait alone in a basement room equipped with chairs and benches before being taken to the chief of the security services . We were informed that owing to a special order lying in front of him from The/LOC Hague/LOC we were being sent to a work detail in Westerbork/CAMP . Our Turkish nationality was not recognised in The/LOC Hague/LOC in June we had seen the official Fraulein Slottke in The/LOC Hague/LOC who on the basis of the papers presented had compiled a comprehensive transcript . He gave us back the money taken by the police officers but kept the ration cards . All of our objections were brusquely rejected . We were led back to the basement room . After a long and anxious wait the police officer who had taken us away emerged in a state of agitation and asked for the whereabouts of our child . We gave evasive answers and were led to a room in which several German officers and female SS helpers were who were by all means necessary trying to find where our child was . We had invented the following story on the day of a big raid that morning during my absence I worked at the Joodschen Raad a male stranger came to my wife and offered to take the child who was 1 ½ years old at the time into safety . In the understandable commotion of the day my wife agreed without asking the name of the man . When I arrived home I was angered by this but reconciled myself that as a Turkish citizen nothing unlawful would come of it . This was met with an unhappy response and they proceeded upon us with threats and insults . We remained steadfast and further explained how we did not know the whereabouts of our child . We were told that we would be put on a penal transport . Accompanied by an SS man we were taken in a small car to the Jewish theatre Joodschen Schouwburg . Thanks to an ingenious manoeuvre by an employee present at the Joodschen Raad we were fortunately not recorded on the list of criminal cases but on the normal transport list instead . The Joodschen Schouwburg was where all  Amsterdam/GPE Jews listed for deportation 2 were assembled prior to their onward travel to Westerbork/CAMP . During the night the majority – if they were not sleeping on the dirtiest and most vermin infested of mattresses – had to sit on chairs . Victuals and other services above all the provisions for the further transport were provided by the employees of the Joodschen Raad in an exemplary fashion . Above all by using all possible reasons to defer they endeavoured to hold back people for as long as possible there were people who had remained there for many weeks and now and again they succeeded in allowing some to disappear . Even though we only had to stay there for half a day we were still sufficiently depressed by this dismal theatre . On that day a transport day the SS made an unpleasant visit to the desert sons . A nurse who could not hear well and who was in the lavatory at the time of the transport list rollcall was beaten pulled by the hair and kicked . We all had to endure the most salacious insults thrown at us and not move . Finally to our relief they marched off . In large motorcoaches we were together with approximately 200 people a small transport taken to the strictly guarded railway trains which took us to the Westerbork/CAMP camp . We arrived there in the night . To our surprise we were received in a large and well lit room in which Jewish workers from the camp registry sat in long rows at typewriters and took down our details . Afterwards we were greeted by our friends and acquaintances . They immediately took into custody anything of value . Afterwards we had to pass the office of the Bank Lippmann and Rosenthal where money valuables and ration stamps were being taken by the wicked Dutch officers with bags and briefcases etc . also being searched . After a brief search in quarantine we there then taken to the penal barrack no . 67 where we all initially stayed until the next day . On the next day those like us who had no criminal record were taken to a different barrack . We came to barrack 66 where we remained until our departure to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP in January 1944 . The Westerbork/CAMP transit camp located in the northern Dutch province of Drenthe/LOC near the town of Assen/LOC originated out of a camp built by the Dutch government in 1939 for Jewish refugees following the events in Germany/GPE in November 1938 . As old camp inmates the Jews who were still there from this time had a preferential position and carried out all important administrative functions in this autonomous Jewish camp . For the purposes of transportations of Jews to the East/LOC the camp was greatly enlarged with living working and administrative barracks provided . Owing to the vast camp terrain one had free movement and only rarely was there a commandant often in plain clothes or an SS man to be seen who all lived outside of the camp . Every person fit for work 3 had to carry out work be it in one of the basic camp range of services administration office duty security the kitchen the hospital the school workshops camp cleaning etc . or in industry battery disassembly old metal sorting sorting beans etc . . Food was administered as such morning coffee at lunch a stew mostly a stamppot in a Dutch style i.e. potatoes and vegetables cooked together . In the hospital where my wife worked there was better food . In addition a large proportion of the camp inmates received food packages from outside which were only allowed to be sent once a month however . There were talks on a variety of things in a similar way to an organised school lesson . On high holidays there was a well attended service . There was even a large theatre hall where satirical and musical performances took place the German commandant was a regular guest . The hospital boasted a comparatively large number of barracks and good doctors . This relatively bearable existence – considering the conditions of camps in Germany/GPE and Poland/GPE – was nevertheless under the constant threat of transportations where once or twice a week in numbers from to people were sent to Auschwitz/CAMP and other eastern camps . The transport lists were read out in the middle of the night by the barrack leaders in the barracks . The atmosphere at the readings resembled a death sentence . Apart from the officials on duty no one was allowed into the transport carriages themselves . The transportation days placed great stress on the nerves of everybody but also provided many examples of mutual support . At the beginning I worked in the cleaning detail . At first I had to drive the refuse bins from the hospital barracks to the waste pits situated outside the camp . Then I had to keep the hospital clean with a brush hoe shovel and wheelbarrow . Later I was assigned to quarantine . There I had to take out the disinfected clothes from the hot air chambers which remained at 120 130 % for two hours and then bundle them up and make them available for collection . The work hours amounted to seven hours . We got a daily bath and later an extra 200 g of fat as an extra allowance . In the quarantine which was under the leadership of the Viennese physician Dr Pick the baptised were very well represented and lived in a special barrack . On January 11th 1944 we went together with the first transport to Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP . For the most part this transport of approximately 1000 people was comprised of applicants for the Palestine/GPE exchange holders of South American passports and dual citizens . One was told the nicest things about the model camp Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP and the remaining inmates envied us . We travelled through the night in a third class carriage for transports to the East there were only ever cattle cars – across the Reich border for the first time in 11 years – past bomb ravaged Bremen/LOC to Bergen/CAMP where we arrived early in the morning on January 12th . 4 The situation immediately became clear to us upon arrival . At the platform stood numerous SS men with fixed weapons and dogs who greeted us with Raus ! Raus ! and Schnell ! Schnell ! The camp commandant Haas a large and stocky man with a sinister look observed the performance with great interest . Women with small children and large suitcases were loaded into trucks . All the others had to walk with all their hand luggage . The 1000 long line moved in a slow march across the country road . After 1 ½ hours we arrived at a black and white barrier to the SS camp . When all we could see on all sides was barbed wire weathered barracks and signs such as political prisoners arms depot etc . it became ever clearer to us that all positive reports were just fantasy and that we had arrived in a German Nazi camp . After an endless wait we did not receive anything to eat for the whole day of role calls registration and turning in money we were divided into barracks . The SS men screamed insulted and commanded . Everything had to be done quickly . Hurrying harrying and improvisation were the hallmarks of camp life in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP . The barracks – in a dismal grey green – were comprised of a dining hall with cupboards and tables and a dormitory with wooden bunk beds . I went into a barrack with a connecting washroom the occupants in other barracks had to go the dirtiest of routes in all weathers to this single washroom . Male and female camps were divided with barbed wire the gate closed in the evenings . Upon our arrival in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP we found a group of roughly 80 Greek Jews who had left Westerbork/CAMP destined for Theresienstadt/GHETTO without ever having heard anything from them . They were later put on transport from Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP to Theresienstadt/GHETTO . The hospital referred to as Revier made a very poor impression . When we were there with our child to remove a boil from the back of their head in the operating room there was literally nothing apart from an operating table and an instrument cabinet with three rusted pairs of scissors . Consequently the doctor had to use my own pair of scissors with a sterile gauze which we had with us . Shortly after our arrival I was taken ill to the hospital with facial erysipelas . The new second barracks were divided with a row of cabinets into male and female sections . There was neither a lavatory nor a washroom . A waste bin served as a lavatory and had to be carried to and fro by the nurse and if it was overflowing it was carried by two helpers . The lighting and heating were insufficient . The medical administration was very perfunctory and the German staff surgeon mostly only came to determine who to discharge . Later the conditions in the hospital improved . 5 There were more doctors even specialists appointed as well as even more nurses . There was even an outpatient clinic and a dentist . Towards the end of our stay in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP with the reduction of space the conditions became much worse . After a few days we were divided up for work . As a mother to a child of under three years my wife did not have to work . I was put into the so called Schuhkommando whose task it was in poorly heated and dusty stone barracks to remove the rubber part from the leather from a pile of shoes as high as a house . At 6 in the morning one had to report for roll call . Then one marched in a long line in rows of five to the work barracks . One was forced to work there until midday . In every barrack there was a Jewish foreman . The SS Oberscharführer who was supervising alternated from barrack to barrack and pushed us towards higher work output with threats and insults . Later more and more were beaten with kicks and leather straps . Various people were so badly treated that they had to be taken to the hospital . Later I came to the Bekleidungskommando clothing Kommando which operated in the magazine of the Waffen SS . The engagement involved loading and unloading hauling things to and fro piling up and counting military equipment from steel helmets to boots . The Kommando had a Hauptscharführer sergeant major with an Unterscharführer and several SS men of Lithuanian and Romanian descent reporting to him . The work was harder than in the Schuhkommando yet not as depressing as it was more varied and one could be out in the fresh air . The surveillance was in such a way that sleights of hand were possible such as holding Hebrew courses reading books or sleeping . Lunchtime lasted 45 minutes and was enough to march in single file back to the Appelplatz roll call area walk quickly inside the barracks wait in line to receive a warm meal mostly swede soup with boiled potatoes to start with later on without quickly gulp down the ¾ litres of soup rush to drop by my wife and child and finally report back to the Appelplatz for the roll call . One returned home in the evenings at 6.45pm . One washed and hurried one always hurried in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP to the women barracks in order to share the meagre bread ration and filling with the wife for the evening meal for a long time there was a thin soup served on certain evenings . One had to be back in one barracks by 8 . There one could still read for a short time listen to a talk discuss the chances of liberation and the current situation in the war based on the most recent Jüdische Presse Agentur JPA rumours or argue about internal barrack matters . Then one would fall asleep exhausted . Special occasions within the camp were the roll calls for the non workers women the elderly children which often lasted for several hours 6 who willingly stood in bad weather one time for eleven hours without food when the SS forgot to count one person . We even had to stand for the roll call for hours on end in the evening when we came back exhausted from work . Punishments involved the deprivation of food being made to stay at the gate without standing or food for hours on end relocation to a particularly arduous or dirty Kommando or spending several days in the bunker on just water and bread . Beatings at the start were very rare but later on became very commonplace carried out with leather belts or rifle butts . From March 1st the Arbeitskommando were not allowed to wear jackets anymore . During the official non work hours on Sunday afternoons we were regularly fetched to carry out work of all kinds often just out of harassment . In some particularly difficult outdoor Kommandos only the elderly were employed . In all weathers they had to dig up tree roots saw wood haul tree trunks etc . all with inadequate equipment and suffering ill treatment . One was only excused from work like in all other Kommandos/LOC when one had a fever of more than 39 degrees . Whoever was very ill but did not meet the minimum fever requirement still had to do the roll call and go to work . The barrack authorities of the SS enforced this order and it happened often enough that ill persons were taken from their beds and forced to work . The number of deaths increased constantly and varied from 25 to 40 each day . Causes of death were above all pneumonia starvation with the associated diarrhoea camp fever even typhoid fever . The later built so called Altersheim old peoples home whose inmates were exempted from work and roll calls became more and more a preparation station for the crematorium . Mystery surrounded the later disappearance of two young Chalutzim who lived cut off from the outside world in a small wooden shelter on the way to the crematorium . As the crematorium later became insufficient corpses were collected and burned in open spaces . At the beginning of June 1944 we were called up along with other Turks and Argentinians and taken to the so called Schneebaum Lager the camp for Jews of neutral nationality . A few days after our arrivals due to the change of the camp elder the name was changed to Aufenthaltslager detention camp Benadon . After we had been put together in the Albala camp initially with Dutch and stateless formally German Jews then later with Frenchmen Albanians Tripolitanian Englishmen Italians South Americans and all other possible nationalities together around 4000 people in the neutral camp there were around 250 persons two thirds of whom Spanish and the rest of Turkish Argentinian Portuguese and Swiss nationality . The marked improvement was that apart from internal camp duties there was no forced labour . Even the food was by all means in the beginning better the hot food was more generous and substantial with a larger bread topping . 7 There was sufficient time for lectures and studies . Minyan was regularly held . Even a Sefer Torah and a shofar were available . Talks in Spanish and French were held and I spoke about the Jews in Holland/GPE and the role of Jewish Palestine/GPE in the/LOC Middle/LOC East/LOC . In spite of all of this the state of health in the neutral camp constantly decreased if at least not as quickly or to the same extent in the Albala camp . The diet here was permanently and wholly insufficient and all the appearances of malnourishment were on show here . There was no doctor in the camp . Very seldom came the staff surgeon or one of the Jewish doctors from the general camp . The administration of medicine was insufficient . For the first time in August and then again for several weeks in September and October 1944 my wife was taken to the hospital in the general camp with a severe and lengthy case of typhus which owing to the poor operating methods took long to diagnose . It was in this time that she had the opportunity to convince herself of the rapid deterioration of conditions there . Due to the constant lack of space three storey beds were put tightly next to one another where the bunk beds were and several people had to sleep in one bed . It often happened that one would wake up in the morning next to a dead person . The lavatories and washrooms were wholly insufficient . For hours and sometimes days there was no water . More and more people were escaping . The punishments became ever more draconian the whole camp went without bread for three days because someone had burned straw in the oven from their mattress . If someone tried to take a turnip or a potato from the kitchen they were beaten half to death and either put in the bunker or put on the gate for a whole day with turnips or potatoes in their hands and a sign around their neck saying I am a thief . I stole from my comrades . During my visit to the hospital after every food distribution I was allowed to take the rations to my wife I was shocked every time by something new in the appearance of people in the general camp . They were emaciated with pale skin and swollen from hunger trudging arduously on their weak legs . Each time my wife would tell me of a group of friends and associates who had died since the last visit . Later the camp elder at Albala/CAMP was dismissed and in his place came a non Jew by the name of Hanke who brought with him a squad of non Jewish Kapos . They were armed with canes which they got generous use out of . As early as five they would appear in the barracks and beat the people out of bed . In January 1945 when Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP began to be converted into a concentration camp and thousands upon thousands of Jews and non Jews came from Auschwitz/CAMP Birkenau/CAMP Ravensbrück/CAMP and Oranienburg/CAMP we had to leave the camp . Fortunately we only had to squeeze into another barrack for two weeks . 8 There were not enough beds a few had to sleep in the gangway and two of whom soon died after . The long roll call was abandoned and the food had to be eaten on the beds . Even during our stay in the old neutral camp large transports of women and girls all without children came from Auschwitz/CAMP and other concentration camps . We had to stay in the barracks during the near approach of these tightly packed shapes who arrived emaciated in clogs and without jackets . We could still them all out of the window . They were accommodated in a tent camp in the rain and snow without any wash facilities or lavatories . Water was administered through a hose for one hour a day whilst the majority of them were already out at work and out of necessity were digging holes . The tents regularly blew and washed away so the women had to stand around all night soaked through in an open space . Many died because of this . Later they did not go past our barracks and instead were redirected into the camp . When we were in the last neutral camp the transports would pile up from the concentration camps . They came night and day . They were forced into a barrack fully unclothed and received a shirt trousers a dress and footwear . Even the bread that they had with them was taken away from them . Some of the SS women took pleasure in throwing the rest of the bread over the camp fence which many of our hungry people then fought over . During the night we heard anxious screams from the women driven into the barracks drowned out by the commands of the SS . My wife witnessed a group of men in the open space forced to fully undress it was in February and the snow had set only to wait two hours to be then dressed in striped cotton prisoners uniform . Women and men from all the occupied European nations came from these transports . Our last stay in Bergen/CAMP Belsen/CAMP was in a complex of old primitive and dirty barracks right at the end of the camp . There was an old and squalid washroom . The most terrible was the lavatory – just one for men and women . It had never been excavated and was difficult to clean off the coarsest of dirt . To get to the washroom and lavatory one had to walk a long way through mud . The food provision was noticeably worse and more disorderly that we often went without coffee or food at 11 and sometimes did not get anything until 5 . One day all food rations were reduced to a quarter . There was no talk of any medical administration . The formerly weekly warm shower had discontinued for some time . The water often failed to materialise for a long time . All the more it leaked through the roof so we had to put several bowls out to stop our beds and clothes from getting soaked to some degree . Furthermore it was like in all other barracks always terribly cold . During the whole winter I constantly had cold feet and whenever it was possible we would lay in bed together . During the evening it was mostly dark due to the regular air raid alarm or alleged cost cutting measures . Often the dim light 9 went out during the meal . There were 105 people of us who belonged to the Turkish group happy when we were told on February 28th that we were to make ourselves ready for the replacement transport on March 4th when our departure really was going to happen the Spaniards and the others were to travel later in the evening that same day . We went by train to Lubeck/CAMP where we met the group from Ravensbrück/CAMP and the Turkish students and then onto Flensburg/CAMP through Denmark/GPE to Helsingoer/LOC where we stayed for a few days and then from Helsingborg/LOC in Sweden/LOC to Goteborg/LOC . On March 15th we departed on the Drottningholm and arrived in Istanbul/GPE on April 10th . Dr. Rudolf Levy . 
Milman née Büchler was born in 1928 in Puchow/LOC in Czechoslovakia/GPE . In 1942 both her brothers were deported . Livia herself went into hiding escaping from place to place and on several occasions living in the open forest . Once she was given refuge by the wife of a Policeman though without the latter knowledge . In Modva/LOC she attended a Protestant girl boarding school which had taken on a group of converted Jewish girls . Many of these were taken away by the SD in 1944 . Mrs Milman together with 60 other Jews was hidden by farmers in a forest near Piestany/LOC until the end of the war . 8 . References Non Jews helping Jews . Illegal Life in Czechoslovakia Report on the underground experiences in Slovakia/GPE 1939 1945 based on the information from Mrs. Livia Milman born Buechler on the 29th February 1928 in Puchov/LOC Czechslovakia/GPE . Livia lived together with her two brothers and their parents in their town of birth where her father owned and ran a big and flourishing butcher shop which included a kosher and non kosher department . Whilst she attended the Buergerschule in town her older brothers attended the nearby Gymnasium in Trenein/CAMP . After the Nazi occupation in 1939 her two brothers had to leave high school and she had to leave her school . Whilst her older brother Ferdninand hence forth worked in her father shop and her other brother Otto trained as an electrician in Trenein/CAMP Livia attended the newly founded Jewish school in Puchov/LOC which had around 30 – 40 Jewish children who were taught in three different classes . The prosecuting measures from the Nazis that soon began put Livia then 12 years old in great fear and anxiety since her father was wealthy he was wrongly imprisoned several times and subjected to blackmail after confronting witnesses who made FALSE accusations when he was once in prison for 3 weeks . But since he denied the FALSE testimony the attempted blackmail was at first in vain . As Slovakia/GPE was affiliated with Nazi Germany/GPE the Slovakian police carried out nightly searches whereby valuables such as silver furs radios etc . were confiscated without compensation . At the beginning of 1941 the butchers which Livia father owned was taken under provisional administration and then aryanised . Livia father started working in another shop and obtained the normal wage of a journeyman however his assets and property were seized . As the first extermination transport in March 1942 from Czechslovakia/GPE departed Livia brother Ferdinand was sent to the collection depot in Zilina/LOC . One week later he was deported no one heard from him again . In April 1942 Livia other brother was brought into the spotlight . His mother tried to see him one more time as he was deported from Trenein/CAMP . She did see him for the last time just as the transportation passed through the station in Puchov/LOC thereafter again nothing was heard from Otto . 2 From that time on the deportations were implemented in a systematic sequence 1 Male Jews from the ages of 16 to 40 years old 2 Female Jews of the same age 3 Married Jewish couples with no children 4 Married Jewish couples with children . Only labour vital for the state who received yellow identity papers were exempt from deportation . When such identity papers were issued they were delivered by post . Livia uncle the lawyer Dr. Emanuel Denes in Pressburg/LOC had attained Identity papers for Livia parents – the married couple Büchler which arrived on the 4th June 1944 in Puchov/LOC . This was of great importance as on the following day a transport for exterminating Jewish married couples with children who did not possess identity papers was compiled . Since the successor of the Aryanised butchers – a Slovakian married couple – who were interested in preventing the timely delivery of the Identity papers to the married couple Büchler the Slovakian authorities in Puchov/LOC held back the Identity papers and let it go back to Pressburg/LOC . Notified by Dr. Denes Mr. Büchler knew the identity papers was in the county town Trencin/CAMP and due to the transportation made a final important appeal to Dr. Denes urging the delivery of the identity papers within three days as the married couple Büchler were still spending time in the detention camp for the final deportation . As Dr. Denes got the identity papers on the 7th June 1944 for the married couple Büchler it was already too late the Büchlers had already been transported from the detention camp in Zilein/CAMP and Dr. Denes found out through Ayrian contacts that Mr. Büchler was forced through ill treatment to disclose which Aryan friends he had deposited cash contributions . As . Dr. Denes Mr. and Mrs. Büchler met at the last minute in front of their removal transport to Zilein/CAMP on the platform they expressed their last wish for Dr. Denes to hide Livia and to deal with the matter of identity papers . Livia then found herself not with her parents Mrs. Büchler had in the expectation of doom sent her on 4th June 1944 to her sister Mrs. Bertha Wohlstein in Dolne/LOC Wasardice/LOC near Hlohovec/LOC . This aunt of Livia was married but did not have any children . Her and her husband cultivated a country estate whose principal owner was Dr. Denes who was the brother of Mrs. Büchlers and Mrs. Wohlsteins . Mr. and Mrs. Wohlstein as well as Dr. Denes possessed identity papers the latter was however a lawyer under occupational ban . As the Slovakian authority – in front of the removal transport to Zilein/LOC – searched for Livia her parents explained that they did not know where she was and then she ran away . Mr. Wohlstein hid Livia for the next three days in an attic . 3 Food was given to her through a roof hatch . On behalf of the police the gendarme searched for Livia but they could not find her . Mr. Wohlstein hid her for ten days at sympathetic friends in Topolony/LOC . He then brought her back and hid her in a back room . Eventually and probably through betrayal Livia was found by the gendarme . Whilst her Aunty Mrs. Wohlstein bombarded the gendarme with pleas and gave him money Livia ran away and hid in the woods nearby . Mr. Wohlstein found her at night and took her back to the people in Topolony/LOC who could no longer keep her which is why her Uncle Dr. Denes took her to be accommodated by Mrs. Chlapik in the area of Nitra/LOC . This was ensured by the daily receipt of money as Livia was unable of paying herself she could withdraw money from another source where her father amongst others had deposited it . Mrs. Chlapik was the wife of an policeman who was transferred to Pressburg/LOC and new nothing of the whole thing . She referred Livia to a protestant boarding school in Modra/LOC by Pressburg/LOC in which school age baptised Jewish girls were able to still be christened . When someone came to visit Mrs. Chlapik Livia immediately hid under the bed and when Mrs. Chlaplik left in the evenings she sat still in the dark . One time Mrs. Chlaplik spoke to Livia about a wicked man who was also incidentally called Chlapik who took money from the Jews . She also revealed that she steals the confidence of young Jewish girls in the guise of protecting them who are then subsequently raped . After eight days Dr. Denes fetched for Livia from Mrs. Chlapik with a taxi of which he knew and trusted the chauffeur . During the drive he proposed to his niece to accept the position as a maid on the basis of Aryan identity papers for which a certain Mr. Chlaplik would provide the money for . Thereupon Livia reported in a whisper what she had learnt about a certain Mr. Chlaplik from his wife . Dr. Denes which at first brought Livia to the Wohlsteins kept the revelations about Chlaplik as he considered them unbelievable and gave him praise . But Mrs. Wohlstein guided by the finer scent of a woman in danger was completely against Dr. Denes suggestion and as Chlaplik came she told him that Livia who they had hid in their house has had an accident and is being treated in hospital in Nitra/LOC . From the Wohlsteins Livia set out to an evangelical Pastor in Deges/LOC recommended by Mrs. Chlaplik the wife of the policeman and was baptised . It was arranged that Dr. Denes should attempt to contact the evangelical boarding school in Modra/LOC . 4 He did not have any success which Livia did not know about as she sneaked to Modra/LOC and turned to the pastor Derer who presented her with her certification of baptism . The pastor told her that he could not take her in the boarding school as there was no more space in the dormitory . Henceforth Livia went to the headmistress of the boarding school Maria Sobinova a Slovakian who – it was in August 1942 – took Livia in the school . She attended the boarding school until June 1944 furthermore she obtained a place for her younger cousin Eva Denes who had also been baptised . As the headmistress was fond of Livia she took her in June 1944 into her own home . As the school headmistress in August 1944 was on a trip the SD surrounded the boarding school as the attendance of 16 baptised Jewish girls had been given away . As Eva Denes had prewarned Livia in a timely manner she hid in the house of the school headmistress as her husband an engineer lay by chance in bed ill . The SD limited themselves in asking him a respectable man through a window if he had hidden any Jews which he chose to deny in order to save Livia . The other girls in the boarding school tried as best they could to hide . For example Eva Denes hid in the vineyard . However only four succeeded in escaping the other twelve – among them Eva Denes – were the next morning abducted by the SD which the headmistress threatened to shoot dead . The headmistress who came back the same day explained that Livia must immediately flee . Livia travelled at night to Pressburg/LOC she arrived at 4 am . She searched immediately for Eva Denes mother who lived in hiding after her husband the lawyer Dr. Denes was deported . On Livia advice and at the risk of her own life Mrs. Denes searched for her daughter to save her at the last minute in which she begged the evangelical priest Derer in Modra/LOC to take action in favour of Eva . However she came 5 minutes too late and in total despair she handed herself to the Nazis . Livia herself took FALSE Aryanian identity papers which she bought just in case a position as a maid in Pressburg/LOC . This position which she had obtained from a newspaper advertisemen was however for her incompatible because her landlord used to come home drunk and 5 his harassment in turn was to be feared . Therefore from a recommendation from another cousin Livia Salzer she took another position as a maid in Piestany/LOC which she occupied until November 1944 . Once again she was then betrayed . However Livia Salzer could warn her in real time and thus Livia Büchler left her position in Piestany/LOC immediately and together with her cousin Livia Salzer they fled to a woods 30 km away from Piestany/LOC where approximately 60 Jews from neighbouring Slovakian farms hid for money and were housed . In case of emergency they had prepared in a nearby forest a bunker in which they both spent the last remaining months of the war which contributed to their safety that the Slovakian partisans conducted themselves in a sympathetic manner . In the middle of this group of Jewish refugees both Livia Büchler and Livia Salzer survived . After the liberation Livia Büchler attended the commercial academy in Bratislava/GPE until the end of her examinations . Afterwards through the Australian Jewish Welfare Society she obtained the entry permit for Australia/GPE on the boat ride she got to know her future husband Mr. Peysach Milman who she married in May 1950 in Melbourne/GPE where she and her husband still now reside . For her marriage she reconverted to Judaism . 